[Amit Varma]: There is this glib takedown of a saying, there are two kinds of people in the world, those
[Amit Varma]: who think there are two kinds of people in the world and those who don't.
[Amit Varma]: I'm wary of generalizing, but I will add to this list of false dichotomies by speculating
[Amit Varma]: that there might be two kinds of people in the world, those given to self reflection
[Amit Varma]: and those who do not reflect on themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Now there's obviously a continuum between the two.
[Amit Varma]: So it's perhaps better to talk of the tendency to self reflect, which exists in a lesser
[Amit Varma]: or greater degree in most people.
[Amit Varma]: When I was younger, I was not given much to self reflection.
[Amit Varma]: I never got meta about myself as it were, I was sure of the talents I had, blind so
[Amit Varma]: often to my good fortune, unaware of how my character was shaped so often by things outside
[Amit Varma]: of me, even unaware of my own character.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't think about why I wanted what I wanted, and why I reacted to events around me the
[Amit Varma]: way I did.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to think that I know myself a bit better now than I did then, but perhaps not
[Amit Varma]: as well as I could.
[Amit Varma]: And in life, I see people who do no self reflection at all.
[Amit Varma]: And those who do examine themselves, and in doing so can point me to truths about myself
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: That is why I love reading memoirs, a good memoir, by definition, is a reflection on
[Amit Varma]: the self.
[Amit Varma]: And that's true of the wonderful memoir written by my guest today.
[Amit Varma]: This is also why I love being able to have the long conversations that I have on the
[Amit Varma]: show.
[Amit Varma]: Because my guests trust me enough to open themselves up to me and to speak without filters.
[Amit Varma]: And most of the time, they give me a lot to think about, even after they've gone home,
[Amit Varma]: and the mics are off, and all is silent.
[Unknown]: Have you also felt that way?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a legendary cricket journalist and editor, Pradeep magazine.
[Amit Varma]: When I started off in cricket journalism in the early 2000s, Pradeep was already one of
[Amit Varma]: the most respected figures in the game, and was sports editor of the Hindustan Times.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't get to know him too well in those days.
[Amit Varma]: But I heard a lot about how he kickstarted the careers of so many young writers by giving
[Amit Varma]: them jobs and mentoring them, teaching them his craft.
[Amit Varma]: In the decades before this, he had been a fearless cricket writer, writing a book on
[Amit Varma]: match fixing that began in 1997 and came out in 1999.
[Amit Varma]: And you'll remember the match fixing scandal really broke in 2000.
[Amit Varma]: He was so far ahead of his time.
[Amit Varma]: The book he wrote then was called Not Quite Cricket.
[Amit Varma]: His latest book, which I love reading, is called Not Just Cricket, a reporter's journey
[Amit Varma]: through modern India.
[Amit Varma]: It has all the qualities of a good memoir.
[Amit Varma]: It has self reflection, and it tells a story not just of the writer, but also of the times
[Amit Varma]: he lived in.
[Amit Varma]: It gave me a lot to think about, not least of which was the role of serendipity in our
[Amit Varma]: lives.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you'll enjoy the conversation as much as I did.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Pradeep, welcome to the Scene in the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me here on your podcast.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a pleasure seeing you after so many years.
[Amit Varma]: We, you know, I was on that tour of Pakistan in 2006, and, you know, we kind of traveled
[Amit Varma]: as part of the same contingent here.
[Amit Varma]: And I really loved reading your book, especially the parts of it which are personal and which
[Amit Varma]: go beyond what you know, like at a professional level, the cricket journalism you have achieved,
[Amit Varma]: we know about it, it's shared, but just sort of the good to go back to your childhood to
[Amit Varma]: learn about how once you were a cricketer, and you were a ferocious hitter, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to what's up, you have, you know, it's refreshing to learn that.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to start by talking about something that you mentioned just before this recording
[Amit Varma]: began, where, you know, when you were asking me about my podcast, I was talking about how
[Amit Varma]: it's probably changed me as a person or maybe age has done that, in the sense that I am
[Amit Varma]: less judgmental of people, I am a better listener, I am much more open.
[Amit Varma]: And then you mentioned that had you written this book 10 years ago, though, Shahid, you
[Amit Varma]: would have been more judgmental, it would have been different, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'd like you to elaborate on that a little bit, that, you know, in what
[Amit Varma]: ways do you think with the passage of time, you know, have you changed as a person and
[Amit Varma]: what role has sort of this book or just the passage of time as it were played on that?
[Guest]: Well, yes, look, if you look at my first book, Not Quite Cricket, which had to do with my
[Guest]: experiences as a cricket reporter with what I saw regarding match fixing, and it's again
[Guest]: a kind of an eyewitness account and oral kind of a history.
[Guest]: There is a lot of anger in that, I realized when I see that book, I realized that I come
[Guest]: from a point of view, which is very judgmental and which is even angry, like, look, I thought
[Guest]: the world would be like this and when I entered that world, there is so much of wrong things,
[Guest]: so much of corruption and everyone else is to be blamed, except for me, in a way.
[Guest]: This book came, I think, 20 years later, much older, I would think much wiser, if that's
[Guest]: the right word to use.
[Guest]: And let me say that I, of late, a few years before even I started this project, I got
[Guest]: deeply involved with Buddhism.
[Guest]: And that too, it just happened that one day, suddenly, I thought I'm going to die.
[Guest]: You know, this feeling of fear, this fear struck me, I was more than 60 and I just out
[Guest]: of the blue, I became a different man, it seems like depression had gripped me.
[Guest]: I couldn't enjoy anything and it lasted for a very, it was a brief period.
[Guest]: And my daughter suggested that why don't you do some meditation and she found out there
[Guest]: is a Toshita center here, which is Dalai Lama run, they have various, at various places,
[Guest]: they have these meditation centers.
[Guest]: So I went there and more than meditation, which obviously has a calming influence, the
[Guest]: whole Buddhist thought of philosophy of causes and conditions and all human beings basically
[Guest]: want to be happy and an emptiness and that slowly changed me.
[Guest]: That slowly made me realize that whatever one does, whatever evil or good, there are
[Guest]: reasons behind this, it's not as if a person does it, just it gets gripped by an evil thought
[Guest]: and he said, I will do this thing wrong or I'll do this right.
[Guest]: There are conditions in which a person is born and those conditions influence him.
[Guest]: He influences those conditions around him and that's how a human being interacts with
[Guest]: the world or the world interacts with that person.
[Guest]: So that made me less and less judgmental and when I started writing this book, every time
[Guest]: I would sit to write, I would calm myself down with a bit of meditation and then tell
[Guest]: myself that, look, though it's my memoir and obviously these are my memories, they will
[Guest]: be colored by my judgments, but let me at least try my best not to be accusatory, not
[Guest]: to blame, just to see things from a distance.
[Guest]: So I think I tried that and I don't know if I succeeded or not, but a lot of people feel
[Guest]: that yes, one of the strengths of the book is that it's not judgmental despite the fact
[Guest]: that there is so much in it, which could have been like, I could have taken a very strong
[Guest]: stance that this is wrong or this is right.
[Guest]: So yes, it has helped me, being non-judgmental has also helped me to understand things better.
[Guest]: I think that's been one of the major factors which in a way I have changed.
[Guest]: I think I have changed a lot in the sense that I don't straight away see a person and
[Guest]: say that, oh, I don't like him, I don't like his, I may not like what he's saying, but
[Guest]: I try to understand why he's saying that and I, yeah, that's it, like, yes, I have changed.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that we sort of live in more judgmental times today?
[Amit Varma]: Because what I kind of see around me is that one, of course, our public discourse is much
[Amit Varma]: more polarized, but there is also this tendency today to automatically treat someone who disagrees
[Amit Varma]: with you as a bad person, especially when it comes to political discourse on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: The assumption is that if there is someone who disagrees with you, their character is
[Amit Varma]: bad.
[Amit Varma]: Not that, you know, and part of this is, of course, what happens, you know, within the
[Amit Varma]: discourse where the incentives are like that.
[Amit Varma]: People go online, they find their ideological tribe of choice, and then they are trying
[Amit Varma]: to raise their status within the tribe by posturing in whatever ways they do.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the ways of doing that is that you, you know, you, you attack people on the
[Amit Varma]: other side, and you attack people on your own side for not being pure enough.
[Amit Varma]: And you're always passing judgment.
[Amit Varma]: And you're always looking at people and not arguments.
[Amit Varma]: And we lose nuances here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we lose nuances, like, whenever I bring guests on the show, with every guest,
[Amit Varma]: I try to first, you know, learn more about how they are as human beings.
[Amit Varma]: And then we can talk about their ideas.
[Amit Varma]: Because then I think one becomes more receptive to their ideas, that even if you disagree,
[Amit Varma]: at least you understand a little better, ki yeh yahan se aara hai, this is a place it's
[Amit Varma]: coming from.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think that in modern times, the way the discourse is, that has become very
[Amit Varma]: shrill, you know, even perhaps the fan discourse around cricket, maybe, you know, that has
[Amit Varma]: become shrill, people are just shouting more.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps earlier, the times were a little gentler.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that I mean, of course, they would be gentler, because many less people
[Amit Varma]: had a voice, which is not a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's a great thing that so many more people have a voice today.
[Guest]: But is this something you've noticed?
[Guest]: Well, I think, A, I would say I'm not very sure how much of the social media, which obviously
[Guest]: is very divided, very shrill, very accusatory.
[Guest]: I mean, some of the language which is used is not done like, people are threatening someone
[Guest]: who doesn't agree with their worldview.
[Guest]: But is that social media reflective of the world we live in?
[Guest]: I mean, or is that social media space limited to certain people?
[Guest]: But we think that's the world around us.
[Guest]: A, one, because I go to play in the mornings, I go to the stadium and meet a lot of people.
[Guest]: I don't see that world as shrill and as angry.
[Guest]: I mean, I meet people, they have their point of view, I may disagree with them.
[Guest]: I still find that those people are, maybe they are older people.
[Guest]: Maybe my interaction with younger people is limited to social media.
[Guest]: And then you have this TV.
[Guest]: I mean, you watch TV news and I'm sure if you are a healthy man, you should be advised
[Guest]: not to watch it because they kind of manipulate you and they want you to get angry because
[Guest]: they want you to get involved.
[Guest]: So this shrillness, this is obviously bound to affect more and more people.
[Guest]: It is affecting more and more people.
[Guest]: As I was saying that I interact with older people, say in the park or wherever I go to
[Guest]: play or my friends.
[Guest]: But I guess it must be difficult to interact with the world which is younger, which is
[Guest]: more prone to formulating opinions on the basis of social media, WhatsApp groups.
[Guest]: So that world, whether it is heading towards more and more anger, like we were just now
[Guest]: discussing about calmness and about non-judgmental, now this is a world where if you don't have
[Guest]: a judgment and if you don't have a judgment which is aggressive, which is like on your
[Guest]: face, which is accusatory, I don't think that person will think that I belong to this world.
[Guest]: He has to.
[Guest]: He has to scream.
[Guest]: He has to shout.
[Guest]: He has to say, no, you are wrong.
[Guest]: I'll kill you.
[Guest]: So I don't know.
[Guest]: I'm not sure.
[Guest]: But yes, from thinking from my space or from our shared space, it looks a bit scary what
[Guest]: the future could be.
[Amit Varma]: No, but the question you asked is, is a really good one that is a world really like this,
[Amit Varma]: like with social media, like what I described really is a vocal minority.
[Amit Varma]: I think the silent majority is not like this.
[Amit Varma]: And they're the kind of people we encounter every day.
[Amit Varma]: And to one extent, they are the reason they are the silent majority is the reason they're
[Amit Varma]: silent is that they want to avoid the shrillness and they want to avoid being attacked for
[Amit Varma]: saying anything at all, which is, you know, kind of what social media is like these days.
[Amit Varma]: But moving on to more pleasant subjects from a time before this existed, you know, tell
[Amit Varma]: me about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: I loved reading your opening chapter.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, at the end of your book, you go back to the theme, but the opening chapter
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about 200 Magazine House, Karan Nagar, Srinagar, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your childhood, what you remember of it, what was it like growing up?
[Guest]: It's difficult going back in time, I realized when I was doing the book, it's, it's, it's,
[Guest]: I mean, you have so many memories and you pick and choose and you.
[Guest]: My childhood in Srinagar, look, I lived there for, as a child, I was there only for 5, 6,
[Guest]: 6, 6, 7 years after that, because my father had a transferable job and not that I used
[Guest]: to go back to Srinagar, my grandparents and other relatives were there.
[Guest]: So every summer we would be back in Srinagar.
[Guest]: So my memories are very pleasant memories and I mean, I'm sure every child would have
[Guest]: similar memories of playing, of, of, of the mother, especially I was very much attached
[Guest]: to my mother.
[Guest]: Most of the kids are.
[Guest]: You would feel the world begins and ends there with your mother.
[Guest]: If your mother is not there, the world is a fearful place.
[Guest]: If your mother is there, it's such a peaceful and wonderful place and it's only when I look
[Guest]: back from, later when I look back at my childhood and realize the significance of, of people
[Guest]: who are living in places where there is, there is a conflict, although at that time that
[Guest]: conflict was not on surface, yet there was a society where, which was a divided society.
[Guest]: I mean, we the Kashmiri Hindus, minorities, but well off, doing well in life, mostly in
[Guest]: government jobs and, and the majority Muslims, our interaction was, as I described in the
[Guest]: book also a little bit, limited to there being as domestic helps, not allowed in the kitchen,
[Guest]: as I said, because my grandparents, my grandmother and other elderly aunts were very, very conservative
[Guest]: and Muslims were not supposed to enter the kitchen.
[Guest]: They were very particular about it and, and, and the kind of impressions it must have formed
[Guest]: in my mind, though I wonder why I remained the way I have, maybe because of my father,
[Guest]: my mother itself, she was, she was not superstitious, she, she, she embraced others, if you, if
[Guest]: you can say that.
[Guest]: So, I had a childhood which, I don't, it wasn't anything different from, I think, childhood
[Guest]: of most other people.
[Guest]: I think where I, I had a, like most of the people have, many migrant experiences, I would
[Guest]: say, I mean, at 7, 8, from Srinagar to Haryana, then from there, after four or five years
[Guest]: to Punjab, then Punjab to, especially in North, but these were different cultures.
[Guest]: I think that probably, I think, built a kind of a complex in me, maybe, a kind of an insecurity.
[Guest]: I mean, you don't, if you are in a secure, like if I was at home in Srinagar with my
[Guest]: same language, same culture, secure environment, from there to be plucked out and put in a
[Guest]: place where you don't understand the language, you are a small kid, even your parents don't
[Guest]: know what's happening around.
[Guest]: I mean, they, they are interacting with the world, which is a different world from their
[Guest]: own world.
[Guest]: So what would a child's impressions be?
[Guest]: I am sure it would, it would affect his, the way he would interact with the world.
[Guest]: I was a very reserved person, till probably in the profession, I started drinking.
[Guest]: I mean, it was only when I used to drink, I would open out with people, otherwise I
[Guest]: would always be, and this feeling was always in me that, am I good enough to compete with
[Guest]: these people?
[Guest]: Am I good enough in profession?
[Guest]: So this migrant experience, I think I was lucky in a way, I was in a profession which
[Guest]: helped me to travel around the world.
[Guest]: So I could see these migrant experiences across, especially Indians in West Indies, in England,
[Guest]: in Australia, in Pakistan, partition people, Muslims who went from here, I have an incident,
[Guest]: an episode there of meeting someone who had gone to Pakistan in 1947 and how miserable
[Guest]: and unhappy he had been there.
[Guest]: So I think this whole rootlessness and this whole desire to somehow find an anchor, I
[Guest]: think maybe it's a human desire, maybe it's a human emotion, which it tries to sustain
[Guest]: itself that, no, there is a past which I can hold on to.
[Guest]: And this kind of a struggle to hold on to a past, to find a past.
[Guest]: In my travels, in my own personal experience, I think that's probably played a role in my
[Guest]: being what I am.
[Guest]: And as I said that, had I not in the last few years been influenced by my Buddhist teachings,
[Guest]: in a way you can say that I have, at least at the moment, found an anchor, something
[Guest]: which I can hold on to and feel the world isn't all that bad a place to be in.
[Amit Varma]: So many things I want to double click on here.
[Amit Varma]: But for a moment, I'll sort of digress from the biographical path, which I want to come
[Amit Varma]: back to and talk about and ask you a larger question.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's a lovely paragraph you've written about your father, Kishan Lalji, where you
[Amit Varma]: write, quote, I considered my father to be a recluse as he barely interacted with us.
[Amit Varma]: But in rare moments of conviviality, he would always tell us that Gandhi and Nehru were
[Amit Varma]: leaders with great vision, who believed in religious harmony and peace, and fought for
[Amit Varma]: social justice and equality.
[Amit Varma]: I still wonder where he and many others around him had acquired this deeply pluralistic worldview,
[Amit Varma]: living as they were in an orthodox and conservative environment, where suspicion of the other
[Amit Varma]: was cloaked in civility, and the fear of the unknown lurked in the shadows.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And this last sentence speaks so deeply to me, because one of the sort of ways in which
[Amit Varma]: a scale has sort of fallen off from my eyes, and something that I didn't see, I think I
[Amit Varma]: now see is in the fundamental nature of our society.
[Amit Varma]: Like I grew up in a sort of elite English speaking bubble, which you know, has a broadly
[Amit Varma]: pluralistic secular view of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And you imagine India is like that.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, yeah, India, we've assimilated everything, we are a delightful khichri of
[Amit Varma]: cultures and languages and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So at one level, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, the divisions that we see in our society today, the bigotry and
[Amit Varma]: the sexism that we see in our society today, the casteism has always been there, and has
[Amit Varma]: been extremely deep rooted, like I did an episode with Akshay Mukul, who wrote this
[Amit Varma]: great book on the Gita Press, which sort of reveals that our society has always been like
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: But it's always been lurking below the surface in the words that you used here, cloaked in
[Amit Varma]: civility, right?
[Amit Varma]: And what so what has happened now is not that a toxic politics has created a toxic populace,
[Amit Varma]: but rather it's the other way around that your toxic politics is supply responding to
[Amit Varma]: demand and our society has always been like this.
[Amit Varma]: And now it has finally found expression.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, has our society always been like this, where people like your father and yourself,
[Amit Varma]: were we the exceptions always were we the outliers, or, you know, are there ebbs and
[Amit Varma]: flows and this is just how it is?
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts?
[Guest]: Well, I think it's a it's quite a complex question and and my response, probably maybe
[Guest]: also complex.
[Guest]: I mean, in a way, yes, my experiences with my relatives, with the people I have grown
[Guest]: up with, has been that they beneath the surface have always been deeply conservative and what
[Guest]: has been unleashed now in public was their worldview right from the beginning.
[Guest]: It's only that the political environment was not encouraging for them to come out openly
[Guest]: and say that yes, they believe in their superiority of their religion.
[Guest]: That's also okay, even if you think your religion is very superior, but the belief that the
[Guest]: other religions are inferior and it's my religion is the only religion which can teach civility
[Guest]: to people.
[Guest]: So, it was there.
[Guest]: I've seen that in my childhood, one of the memories I describe in the book is of one
[Guest]: of my uncles getting furious at that one Hindu girl has married a Muslim or there is a dispute
[Guest]: that has she married or was she abducted or was she or did she elope and the kind of anger
[Guest]: which was on display even as a child, I still some of that memory has remained in my mind
[Guest]: that anger that that image of my uncle getting so furious and angry.
[Guest]: See, I also have had unlike a lot of my friends, later friends who have as you say that we
[Guest]: so called liberals have been educated in public schools and I had this mix.
[Guest]: I had a one year in a public school in Srinagar, then I Yamunanagar, Panipat, this whole absence
[Guest]: of proper public schools.
[Guest]: I would probably have also had the same experience, but I think I'm lucky that I didn't have that
[Guest]: experience.
[Guest]: I had my schooling in Panipat in a pure Hindi medium school, which was steeped in the very
[Guest]: conservative Indian traditions with all class consciousness being there as I do describe
[Guest]: that in the book.
[Guest]: So those experiences of mine, I mean, I probably must have been soaking in a world which wasn't
[Guest]: as liberal as a lot of my friends later would.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember till a long period of time, the reference points of my friends who were
[Guest]: public school educated were very different from my reference points.
[Guest]: I mean, I wasn't schooled in or I wasn't taught about the Western music.
[Guest]: I wasn't aware of what it is all about.
[Guest]: And I suddenly I would see my friends singing those songs or talking about them and I would
[Guest]: feel this inferiority complex that look, I'm not and my mother was deeply involved with
[Guest]: watching films like every Indian is and she was deeply immersed in listening to Hindi
[Guest]: film music like most of the Indian families are.
[Guest]: I still retain that my love for old film songs.
[Guest]: In fact, I have this, one of my greatest strengths is that I tell people that play any song from
[Guest]: 50s, 60s, 70s and the moment you put on that song, the music, within one second I'll tell
[Guest]: you which that song is.
[Guest]: So this is how like we have grown, I have grown.
[Guest]: These probably were my reference points.
[Guest]: So your question that we were always a very conservative society, I think we were always
[Guest]: a society which took pride in their own religion and look as a kid, I never knew that there
[Guest]: are caste divisions, like the school or even at home.
[Guest]: If there was a caste talk, it was always in a very derogatory sense that these people
[Guest]: were like the chuda or the cleaner in the house.
[Guest]: So this is how you grow, you're never taught in school that all these things, why, from
[Guest]: where they came, how wrong were they, it's only later my own education.
[Guest]: I think in the book, I tried my best to be true to what I was whenever I was there, because
[Guest]: I took a very conscious decision to try my best to tell a story of a middle class boy
[Guest]: who is not even aware of, I mean, what is it my fault that I'm being made aware of things
[Guest]: as a lived experience and I have to connect, I have to find out why, why is it so.
[Guest]: So yes, I think with the political environment of today is such that it has encouraged people
[Guest]: to unleash all those beliefs they had, which we thought we didn't have.
[Guest]: So it's all in the open now, I'm sure if in the late 50s, early 60s, I was in Srinagar,
[Guest]: if there was a state which was radically right wing, I'm sure they would have been openly
[Guest]: talking about all those things.
[Amit Varma]: I was very struck by this one story from your time in Panipat, where you speak about your
[Amit Varma]: friends.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, your classmate was Shekhar Gupta and, you know, and he reappears at different
[Amit Varma]: points through the book and plays a part in your life.
[Amit Varma]: But I was struck by another classmate you mentioned, someone called Suraj.
[Amit Varma]: And you said that Suraj used to come to the school in kurta pajama.
[Amit Varma]: And then one day he stopped coming.
[Amit Varma]: And nobody knew where he had gone.
[Amit Varma]: And one day when you were on the road, you saw him as part of a wedding band and he's
[Amit Varma]: marching along with it.
[Amit Varma]: And you called out to him and he completely ignored you.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that you remember this is to me something, you know, obviously, the story
[Amit Varma]: struck you and stayed with you.
[Amit Varma]: And when I look back on my life, I try to sort of identify the many layers of unseeing
[Amit Varma]: as it were, which gradually kind of fall, you know, you grow up in a certain way, you
[Amit Varma]: might not be aware of, say, how class functions or how caste functions or, you know, how gender
[Amit Varma]: functions and gradually those layers slip away and you sort of realize you see something
[Amit Varma]: you never saw before, even though it was in front of you.
[Amit Varma]: So were there moments like that for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like it seems to me that at some visceral, instinctive level, this story must have affected
[Amit Varma]: you a lot that 50 years later, you're telling the story, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what were and again, when you speak about in Srinagar, how the Muslims were treated
[Amit Varma]: and if they touched a vessel, it would be washed and it was almost like they were a
[Amit Varma]: lower caste as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is something I'm assuming that you're looking back and in hindsight, you are beginning
[Amit Varma]: to see what was happening.
[Amit Varma]: And at the time, obviously, you would have been too small.
[Amit Varma]: So through your life, what are the different kind of layers that have fallen away like
[Amit Varma]: this, if you can put a sort of a finger on those?
[Guest]: You mean, which have deeply influenced me?
[Amit Varma]: Which have influenced you or where you just felt that you began to see something differently,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so you might go to school and all the boys are just boys, they're all just your
[Amit Varma]: classmates.
[Amit Varma]: But with the Suraj incident, he leaves and you see him playing in a wedding band.
[Amit Varma]: It's like it does the story just underscores that no, these are not all just classmates.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many other things going on here, which are so poignant and so sort of tragic.
[Guest]: See, I think it is my father, despite the fact that we didn't have a very, I mean, it
[Guest]: was not there was a relationship wasn't bad.
[Guest]: But in the sense that, you know, that that period, the father was supposed to like come
[Guest]: back tired and don't don't disturb him.
[Guest]: And no, it wasn't like what you see today, or what must have been at that time also with
[Guest]: a lot of other kids.
[Guest]: It was neither bad, neither was it very like, you know, like you full of warmth or my mother,
[Guest]: but my father was a very deeply pluralistic person and he was deeply involved with talking
[Guest]: on politics.
[Guest]: So, I would listen when even when he was to interact with other people, he used to have
[Guest]: a lot of arguments with his own relatives on this.
[Guest]: So I probably it seeped into my mind, it subconsciously, I got influenced.
[Guest]: My mother, as I said, was, despite being, I mean, she wouldn't eat outside any non-veg,
[Guest]: she was a non-vegetarian like majority of Kashmiri Hindus are, Brahmins are.
[Guest]: But she wouldn't eat outside because she would think it's beef.
[Guest]: She had this, I have this story in the book where we visit a Muslim family much later
[Guest]: in life and they serve us kebabs and she's reluctant to eat because she thinks it will
[Guest]: be beef and that friend of ours, my brother's friend, convinces, the family convinces that
[Guest]: it's not beef, it's mutton.
[Guest]: So those things must have influenced me.
[Guest]: I think the Suraj incident, I think Mandal influenced me very deeply in this.
[Guest]: I remember, I have in the book itself, there is this character, my friend, Jatinder Chadha,
[Guest]: who is at the other extreme spectrum of, he's not today, but at that time he was.
[Amit Varma]: RSS supporter.
[Guest]: Yeah, he was an RSS supporter, he used to drink with him, used to have a lot of debates
[Guest]: with him.
[Guest]: And that was a period when I was used to debate with him, the whole caste structure and, you
[Guest]: know, you wonder why are people, I mean, it's not my fault if I am born in a privileged
[Guest]: family, anyone's fault.
[Guest]: Similarly, if you are born in a lower caste or a poor family, do you blame that person
[Guest]: for that?
[Guest]: It's not his fault or her fault.
[Guest]: But this disparity, this disparity, now, whether it is, why is it so?
[Guest]: We all grapple with this question.
[Guest]: We try to find an answer that what is the reason behind this disparity at birth?
[Guest]: Forget that you transcend that and you work hard or whatever, you're lucky.
[Guest]: But there are, in India, there are more percentage of people whom you say it's bad luck that
[Guest]: they are born in those environments.
[Guest]: So is it bad luck, is it to do with karma, is it to do with, what is it to do with?
[Guest]: So we used to have these massive debates while drinking that why is the society the way it
[Guest]: is?
[Guest]: And somehow the conclusion used to be that it's possible that their karmic past may have
[Guest]: been bad.
[Guest]: So they were born there.
[Guest]: So I would, maybe I was not convinced that this is like the way it is, but I was not
[Guest]: deeply questioning it also.
[Guest]: When Mandal happened and it's the reaction of my people, my friends, surrounding neighbors,
[Guest]: relatives, the way it surfaced, it took me by great surprise, it shook me to see that
[Guest]: they had so much of disdain for people who were poor.
[Guest]: And that is where I think Suraj, that memory may have got even more deepened in my mind.
[Guest]: See I was there, this Suraj was a protector in the school because even though people in
[Guest]: school would see me as a very fair, as I say, chikna, like this upper class guy who is in
[Guest]: a school with students who don't belong to maybe that class, a lot of them.
[Guest]: So they would take pleasure in, sadistic pleasure in troubling me.
[Guest]: And this helpless poor boy, as I was, and then found a protector in Suraj, who would
[Guest]: like tell these guys to get lost and because of him, I could be in peace at school.
[Guest]: So now this guy vanishes and I have lost my protector and then I see him and the very
[Guest]: fact that he's playing a band was a shock to me at that age.
[Guest]: And then he refuses to recognize me.
[Guest]: I go towards him with so much of warmth and so much of feeling of gratitude or happiness
[Guest]: that I have finally seen him where he is and I want to know, where have you vanished?
[Guest]: And he just treats me with almost in a way with contempt that I don't recognize you.
[Guest]: So when Mandal happened and this connection in the book, it had happened while I was writing
[Guest]: about Suraj.
[Guest]: I had this Mandal and I, in fact, it happened that I somehow realized that I was living
[Guest]: in a world which my people were not telling me the real story.
[Guest]: I realized that there is a deep in-built exploitation in this caste structure.
[Guest]: Okay, you're born poor, but that doesn't mean that you should not be given self-respect
[Guest]: and dignity, which I realized that we lack that.
[Guest]: We lack that sensitivity.
[Guest]: It made a major impact on me.
[Guest]: I started re-looking at a lot of things, re-looking at caste, re-looking at Ambedkar, re-looking
[Guest]: at Gandhi itself.
[Guest]: So that and then Babri Majjid demolition also, I mean, all these things were running parallel
[Guest]: to each other and since my being from Kashmir and my own relatives having had to flee that
[Guest]: place and so all this was playing in my mind and I sort of realized that instead of coming
[Guest]: from a pulpit and saying that, look, we are being wronged, I realized that there were
[Guest]: a lot of wrongs which we ourselves had committed.
[Guest]: So, why be so judgmental and so feel superior?
[Guest]: I started introspecting and then I was living in this period of terrorism in Punjab.
[Guest]: I had Sikh friends.
[Guest]: I had some very close couple of Sikh friends.
[Guest]: One was Randhir, who wasn't interested in the entire politics of what was happening,
[Guest]: but I had another friend, Dhaliwal, who was a very keen political animal and he would
[Guest]: tell me about exploitation by Brahmins, exploitation by Baniyas.
[Guest]: I would not like it because I was in that period of time.
[Guest]: I was in myself in a flux, what is right, what is wrong, but Mrs. Gandhi's assassination,
[Guest]: the reaction to it, Operation Blue Star, I think all those factors changed me completely.
[Guest]: I mean, I started forming a worldview which I didn't have at that time.
[Guest]: My worldview was like whatever my majority around me used to tell me.
[Guest]: These things made a deep impression on me and it was, I was 40 when I had almost formulated
[Guest]: my worldview.
[Guest]: I came to Delhi, to a bigger city, more insecure, insular city than wherever I had lived earlier.
[Amit Varma]: So before we started recording, we were sort of chatting about how opinions and worldviews
[Amit Varma]: get formed today.
[Amit Varma]: Like one experiment, which listeners will be familiar with, I tried a couple of years
[Amit Varma]: back was I wanted to sort of delve into the extreme side of the Hindu right wing to see
[Amit Varma]: what they're up to.
[Amit Varma]: So I opened up, but I didn't want my social media algorithms to get affected by my searches.
[Amit Varma]: So I opened up YouTube in an incognito window and discovered people like Yati Narsinanand
[Amit Varma]: and all that, all these toxic folks well before, you know, they were in the news in the way
[Amit Varma]: that they are today.
[Amit Varma]: And over time, therefore, what happened was, and because I was doing that under another
[Amit Varma]: Google account and incognito windows, so completely different, is that I found that I had two
[Amit Varma]: YouTubes.
[Amit Varma]: And one is a regular YouTube, which is me, all the things I'm interested in, the chess
[Amit Varma]: and the music and whatever reflects who I am.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one is completely different and is so completely different that there's
[Amit Varma]: no relation between the two.
[Amit Varma]: And it also therefore strikes me that how does a worldview get formed?
[Amit Varma]: If you're 15 years old today, and your friend sends you a video, and the video is about
[Amit Varma]: Oh, look, the Muslims are doing this, or this is happening, and so on and so forth, one
[Amit Varma]: of those videos, then your algorithms will pump out more of the same.
[Amit Varma]: And they pump out more of the same to the extent that your entire world is so dominated
[Amit Varma]: by the worldview, that it seems a complete aberration that anything else exists or that
[Amit Varma]: any other way of thinking is reasonable.
[Amit Varma]: So you automatically then begin to believe that anyone who disagrees with you is evil
[Amit Varma]: or they under the pay of someone or their foreign agents and all of that nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: And it is not the fault of the person.
[Amit Varma]: It's just the way the world is.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by again, a beautiful self reflective passage in your book, where you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how when you were young, you could also get carried away by jingoism and this
[Amit Varma]: and that.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you write, quote, I am not sure whether I really believe this in my heart,
[Amit Varma]: or all this aggressive talk was just an outpouring of my own insecurities and frustrations as
[Amit Varma]: a middle class youth, aspiring to a life of comfort and security, as led by some of my
[Amit Varma]: friends who belong to well off business families, while it was possible that this insecurity
[Amit Varma]: could have influenced my ideas.
[Amit Varma]: It was also true that my wealthier friend said even more militant, aggressive and xenophobic
[Amit Varma]: mindsets than I did, stop good.
[Amit Varma]: So now, this self reflection, of course, is coming later.
[Amit Varma]: But what has also happened is that you didn't remain like that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there is a josh of youth where you are proud to be part of a tribe and you're
[Amit Varma]: aggressive and all of that, and then that dissipates and then you become who you are.
[Amit Varma]: But many people for many people, it doesn't dissipate, it remains it remains it gets solidified,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like your friend, Jatinder Chadha, you mentioned, who, you know, kind of stayed
[Amit Varma]: in that space.
[Amit Varma]: So just sort of looking back through your life, the people you have known, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Is it the outliers who change?
[Amit Varma]: Is it the outliers who can do the self reflection?
[Amit Varma]: Who can, who can allow something like Mandal to remind them of a friend from 20 years ago
[Amit Varma]: in school?
[Amit Varma]: Is it the outliers who change and, and and if not, if it is possible that many people
[Amit Varma]: can change these early views and come out of it and look at the world differently in
[Amit Varma]: a more tolerant, liberal way?
[Amit Varma]: What can cause that to happen?
[Guest]: Well, it's it's quite a scary thought that if if the generation which is today living
[Guest]: the if I go back and there was no social media, there was just interaction, there were reflections
[Guest]: because you had space and time for reflection also, which is no longer here.
[Guest]: Everyone is busy, even I am busy with my mobile all the time.
[Guest]: And I tell myself that what am I doing like, my mind is being all the time being controlled
[Guest]: and I'm much older, like we are older and yet we fall into this trap with younger people.
[Guest]: That's the way they have seen the world that they are living a life, which is there existing
[Guest]: already.
[Guest]: It's not as if they have created this world.
[Guest]: So this technology, as one of my friends tells me, has hacked, see the the minds of younger
[Guest]: people or all people have been hacked already by this technology, by the use of this technology.
[Guest]: If the mind has already been hacked, so what is left there?
[Guest]: You are no longer thinking or doing something with the reflection, with a pause, with and
[Guest]: I think the biggest loss.
[Guest]: I remember I had gone to Calcutta for my book release and there we met, there were a couple
[Guest]: of sessions on Satyajit Ray and this great actor, Dhritaman Chatterjee, he was doing
[Guest]: one session.
[Guest]: And then after the session, there was a get together where we started talking and we start
[Guest]: talking about Ray and then this discussion about whether Ray is a filmmaker because there
[Guest]: is a lot of criticism about Ray is that he was not a political animal like Hrithik Ghatak
[Guest]: or Mrinal Sen or his films kind of avoided getting into these real serious subaltern
[Guest]: issues.
[Guest]: So, Dhritaman Chatterjee said something which just stayed with me after that, not in that
[Guest]: context but in the context of your question as well.
[Guest]: He said that look, Ray of course was an elite.
[Guest]: He was an elite and a lot of the subaltern things he couldn't understand also.
[Guest]: But what rescued him was empathy.
[Guest]: I mean that was a wonderful summation of, I think, not just Ray, but what can rescue
[Guest]: us?
[Guest]: We see so much of wrong things happening around us.
[Guest]: Should our reaction be to act the same manner?
[Guest]: Unless we have empathy, unless we, we need to be rescued by empathy.
[Guest]: I think this present civilization or India, it can only be rescued by empathy.
[Guest]: But where will that empathy come from?
[Guest]: It will come from, I think, some kind of reflection, maybe a miracle one would hope.
[Guest]: But unless a society or a community or a religion does not have that empathy, that compassion,
[Guest]: that sensitivity, it will be difficult for those people to live in peace because they
[Guest]: will be always in rage, always in anger, always in a mood to take revenge.
[Guest]: And finally, when you take revenge, when you live with those emotions, whom are you harming?
[Guest]: You may be harming the person whom you are attacking, but in the end, you are harming
[Guest]: yourself as well.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm actually a big fan of Satyajit Ray and I don't agree with that criticism.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you look at films like Prothi Dwandi or Seema Baudho and I think they are politically
[Guest]: very...
[Guest]: I discovered that after that I saw those films again and even Agantok, they are all deeply
[Guest]: political films.
[Guest]: And his Gare Bare is a deeply anti-right film, I discovered and I said that, no, maybe it
[Guest]: is not just his empathy, maybe he was as well involved with these issues.
[Guest]: But only thing is, being the great master he was, he wasn't overstated, he was understated.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it was subtle, it wasn't overt, but through the human stories of the people in
[Amit Varma]: his films, it kind of came out.
[Amit Varma]: Taking off from this point about empathy, which is a beautiful and very deep point,
[Amit Varma]: so thank you for that story.
[Amit Varma]: Another theme that I've been thinking about and I sometimes discuss with my guests on
[Amit Varma]: the show is of the difference between the concrete and the abstract.
[Amit Varma]: And Anshul Malhotra, who wrote this beautiful book on partition, when she did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with me, spoke about how once she was, you know, while interviewing people for a book,
[Amit Varma]: she was sitting with a family in Pakistan who had come across during partition and obviously
[Amit Varma]: they were, you know, raging against what the Hindus had done and the Hindus are like this
[Amit Varma]: and the Hindus are like that.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point they noticed that she's sitting there and they said, tum nahi beti, tum nahi,
[Amit Varma]: tum toh theek ho.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, this is the difference between the abstract and the concrete, that I think
[Amit Varma]: that many of the things that make us hateful are abstract concepts like nationalism and
[Amit Varma]: purity and race and all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: But in the concrete, when you encounter another human being, sometimes your instincts are
[Amit Varma]: not quite like that, you know, sometimes then you see the humanity in them, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: so it's, it's, you know, a lot of bigots will say, oh, but I have Muslim friends, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's become a cliche and a joke.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is that they might actually be right, they do have Muslim friends who
[Amit Varma]: they consider friends, but that's a concrete.
[Amit Varma]: But in the abstract, they are full of hate and abstractions scale faster than the concrete
[Amit Varma]: and where empathy comes from, the point that you bring about is the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: I can feel empathetic for something that is in front of me in flesh and blood.
[Amit Varma]: I can't feel empathetic at a conceptual level for a people or whatever, you know, so if
[Amit Varma]: you demonize a particular set of people as the other, it's hard to be empathetic in the
[Amit Varma]: abstract sense, but you're in front of me and I can be empathetic because I see that
[Amit Varma]: you're like me with my insecurities and fears and, you know, some amount of shared journey
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and that possibility exists.
[Amit Varma]: So I just feel that for empathy to take place, there has to be more of the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: And unfortunately, like you pointed out, we are actually all the time staring into our
[Amit Varma]: smartphones, you know, you go into a cafe today.
[Amit Varma]: If you sit alone, and you're just looking around, you're like a sociopath.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody does that, right?
[Amit Varma]: Everybody's looking into their smartphone.
[Amit Varma]: They're not looking at the flesh and blood people around them who are, and everybody's
[Amit Varma]: so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody has a story, you can learn something from everyone, you can find warmth and comfort
[Amit Varma]: in everyone.
[Amit Varma]: But we are looking into our smartphones, leaving the concrete for the abstract.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, I'm just responding, there's not really a question in this, I was just sort
[Guest]: of...
[Guest]: No, I agree with you completely.
[Guest]: Because even I have had these experiences.
[Guest]: There was a time in Delhi, when one of my friends, Vivek Raina, who is in the book also,
[Guest]: he had, he and another Muslim friend of his that started this group called, like, let
[Guest]: everyone, let us be inclusive and be together.
[Guest]: It's a line from her poem, like, let everyone sleep in the same quilt and pull the rope
[Guest]: in the same direction.
[Guest]: So they'd started this group in which Muslims and Kashmiri Hindus would interact and went
[Guest]: there, even anger.
[Guest]: One of, they had a meeting in Delhi where physically all of us went, I also went.
[Guest]: And there was this young Muslim who was angry, he said that, I've been told at home that
[Guest]: Hindus are like, what you were saying, same kind of a tone and tenor of the Hindus, they've
[Guest]: done this to us, and they are bad and this thing.
[Guest]: And then when my turn came to speak, I made an emotional speech.
[Guest]: So after that, he came to me and saying that, you are different, like, you're different.
[Guest]: And I tried to explain to him that it's not I am different, it's like you haven't interacted
[Guest]: physically with the other side, because most of the Muslims in Kashmir Valley haven't interacted
[Guest]: with their Kashmiri Hindus, because 90% of them left that place, or 95%.
[Guest]: So yes, this abstract world and the concrete world, and right now the tragedy is we are
[Guest]: living in the more and more in abstract world, there is no concrete world around us.
[Guest]: So unless people who are hacking this mind realize the dangers of hacking a mind and
[Guest]: what can it result in, unless they realize, I think we are facing scary times.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'll just go on a little sort of rant about the hacking the mind sort of
[Amit Varma]: point.
[Amit Varma]: So I was a professional poker player for about five years.
[Amit Varma]: And it's of course a game of skill, but it's the only game of skill you'll play inside
[Amit Varma]: a casino.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you're not playing against the house, you're playing against other players.
[Amit Varma]: But every other game in a casino is obviously, you know, a losing proposition for the players.
[Amit Varma]: And I read this very interesting book, I've forgotten the name, I'll link it from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes about how casinos historically have been hacking the mind, so to say how
[Amit Varma]: they have been sort of manipulating their users in such a way that they can direct behavior.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, way before the age of the internet or whatever, you know, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: a slot machine, a person is sitting on it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So one, all the lights and the sounds and everything that happens is meant to just lull
[Amit Varma]: you into the state of near hypnosis, where you're just sitting, you can't take action,
[Amit Varma]: you just keep playing to from the pattern of your play, they have a way of figuring
[Amit Varma]: out that this person is about to get up in the next 10 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever they figure this out, there'll be an alarm that rings in whatever the control
[Amit Varma]: room is, and somebody will go down from there to this player.
[Amit Varma]: And they will say, Sir, you've been playing for so long, we'd like to reward you with
[Amit Varma]: a free drink and some free snacks, and they put it there.
[Amit Varma]: And the guy continues playing, right?
[Amit Varma]: So everything that therefore you use, the gambling industry really nailed it because
[Amit Varma]: they have the best incentives to control human behavior.
[Amit Varma]: Now what's happened in modern times is that hacking the mind is a perfect phrase, but
[Amit Varma]: it also can lead to a misunderstanding where people think that there is directionality
[Amit Varma]: that somebody, some evil force is trying to manipulate us and hack the mind.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, that's not always the case.
[Amit Varma]: What social media sites and platforms want to do is maximize engagement.
[Amit Varma]: The longer you spend there, you know, the more data they have on you, and the more ads
[Amit Varma]: they can serve you, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So they maximize engagement.
[Amit Varma]: Now a result of maximizing engagement, an unpleasant side effect is that you get served
[Amit Varma]: more and more of the same content that you kind of want to like in the case of that 15
[Amit Varma]: year old kid, you send him one Hindutva video, and that's, you know, going to be the majority
[Amit Varma]: of what he gets.
[Amit Varma]: So the problem here isn't a problem of evil.
[Amit Varma]: The problem here is a problem of an unintended consequence that some site has maximized engagement,
[Amit Varma]: which is after all what they are rationally going to do.
[Amit Varma]: But the result of that is that we are having a divided and polarized society and all these
[Amit Varma]: other things are happening.
[Amit Varma]: That's one of the unpleasant consequences.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, it's just a mini rant that you know, because hacking the mind, you can think that
[Amit Varma]: oh, there is BJP is hacking your mind or nobody will hack your mind, even everybody will hear
[Guest]: I think when it gets mixed up with with business, it becomes even a greater deadly cocktail
[Guest]: because because they they know that this man or this woman is looking at these videos.
[Guest]: So they want to hold your attention on to they'll feed you that and if I am looking
[Guest]: at completely different kind of write ups of videos, they'll provide me that because
[Guest]: they want to retain that attention.
[Guest]: And now in retaining that attention, they are not bothered about how it's affecting
[Guest]: me or you or so that that becomes even even more dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I mean, we're talking in a time where this is an open question, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 10 years later, maybe is resolved.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe it's just this point in time where it's a problem because I get deep unease when
[Amit Varma]: people talk about the state regulating social media, because my sense is that the state
[Amit Varma]: is now going to regulate and decide what goes and what doesn't go.
[Amit Varma]: I feel that that can lead to really suboptimal solutions like big because the state is what
[Amit Varma]: it is, right.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, what are the incentives for social media platforms to do this themselves
[Amit Varma]: is an interesting question.
[Amit Varma]: And I see that people in social media platforms do think about this stuff, you know, so like,
[Amit Varma]: for example, on Twitter, sometimes, you know, I wrote a piece once and somebody tweeted
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: So I was just clicking on the retweet.
[Amit Varma]: And the question came up that, do you want to read this first before you retweet it?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Guest]: So it is noticing that you haven't read it, but you just saw the headline, do you want
[Amit Varma]: to read it first, which I think is a great initiative, which Twitter does.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Facebook does kind of similar things, WhatsApp will tell you that this message
[Amit Varma]: has been forwarded many times.
[Amit Varma]: So you kind of get a sense of that it's something that is being propagated.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, it's it's sort of very much a sort of open question.
[Amit Varma]: Another theme that I want to sort of double click on, which you mentioned earlier, is
[Amit Varma]: your experience, in a sense as a migrant that as a child, you go to Panipat, then from you
[Amit Varma]: know, and Haryana culture is like I was born and brought up in Chandigarh.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a little sense of that in Haryana culture is a whole different thing.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go to Amritsar, and you know, Sikhs all around you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a whole different thing.
[Amit Varma]: And then you come to Chandigarh, where you spend a while, and then eventually, Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: and then of course, you're traveling the world.
[Amit Varma]: So you're exposed to all these different cultures, including Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, do you feel that that experience of migrating and seeing different cultures,
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of people, has the effect of taking a person out of their shell and
[Amit Varma]: out of any bubble that may be forming around them, and broaden their worldview?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it only in your case that it happened?
[Amit Varma]: And I might be overthinking it by just asking the question.
[Guest]: Well, I was about to say that, in my case, yes, I am thankful and grateful to my circumstances
[Guest]: and I could see the world, literally see the world without spending my own money.
[Guest]: Cricket helped me to travel the world and travel across India as well.
[Guest]: It opened my mind.
[Guest]: It's like you are in a frog in a well, they say.
[Guest]: So I was a frog in a well.
[Guest]: If I had stayed in Srinagar, my worldview probably would have been the same as majority
[Guest]: of people have there.
[Guest]: It changed, so it does change your worldview.
[Guest]: But I think you need certain other triggers with it too.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to latch on to those triggers.
[Guest]: Some people do latch on, some people may be so obdurate or so stubborn in their thinking
[Guest]: that they, instead of latching on to those triggers, they probably reinforce their, you
[Guest]: know, there is this comfort zone, which we all like to live.
[Guest]: And that comfort zone is like, the same ideas which you have, you want to recycle them and
[Guest]: feel comfortable with them instead of going into this uncomfortable zone where you're
[Guest]: questioning those ideas.
[Guest]: It's not easy.
[Guest]: But yes, I think travel makes a person more, you accept, you realize there are differences.
[Guest]: In my case, and I'm sure in a majority of the cases, once you see that there are people
[Guest]: different, there are people who have a different religion, they have a different way of eating
[Guest]: food, different way of, culturally they are different.
[Guest]: And yet you see that they are as good or as bad human beings as your own people are.
[Guest]: So you accept, you accept them.
[Guest]: Once you start accepting them, your worldview also opens.
[Guest]: You also try to, you also want to see the world from their perspective.
[Guest]: In my case, yes, because interacting with, as you said, in Haryana, with different culture,
[Guest]: in Punjab, in Chandigarh, my interaction with the whole Sikh community opened my eyes to
[Guest]: a world which was very different from my world.
[Guest]: I mean, very different from my gods, my religious beliefs.
[Guest]: So yes, it has helped me, it has helped me to reach a stage where we are interacting
[Guest]: here and trying to explore a more pluralistic world and why there isn't a pluralistic world.
[Amit Varma]: Is it getting destroyed?
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about your childhood now and your love for cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And like one aspect of it, I'd like to sort of explore, which I think is hard for people
[Amit Varma]: today to kind of grasp, is that all of us who, so many of us who loved cricket back
[Amit Varma]: in the day, loved a cricket that was played in the imagination, because there is no television.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all your sporting heroes, you've never actually seen them.
[Amit Varma]: You might not even recognize them if you run across them in the road.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you fell in love with cricket.
[Amit Varma]: How would you consume cricket?
[Amit Varma]: When did you feel that you want to be a player yourself?
[Amit Varma]: You know, just what was that sort of mahal like where?
[Guest]: I think it was that the school I was in Srinagar, Bernal School, it was a missionary school
[Guest]: and cricket was the main sport.
[Guest]: And I would see young boys playing the game in their whites and this, you know, it's beautiful
[Guest]: to be playing in those trees, chenna trees, surrounded by chenna trees, the beautiful
[Guest]: green.
[Guest]: It was like an English, British setting, whites and red ball.
[Guest]: And then my brother was a good cricketer.
[Guest]: So it somehow, it somehow happened that I don't even remember when I started playing
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: No, it just, it happened school simultaneously.
[Guest]: And then you used to play in our lanes in around our house with young kids playing.
[Guest]: And then I came to Panipat, I was a very terrible student and then because of this whole mismatch
[Guest]: of first English medium, then Hindi medium, I couldn't like, the language itself had become
[Guest]: a problem.
[Guest]: I was neither here nor there.
[Guest]: I was neither good at Hindi, nor good at English.
[Guest]: And cricket came to my rescue.
[Guest]: I mean, a very terrified student with fellow students troubling me and not good at studies.
[Guest]: There was this trial in the school, I think I was in seventh or eighth and somehow I went
[Guest]: to the, gave the trial, I started, like they all thought that I was very good.
[Guest]: And I probably must have been good enough for that school and that place.
[Guest]: Because I remember that we won the inter-school championship, we had three school rivals.
[Guest]: And I must have taken if I am not wrong, 10-10 wickets in almost every match with my offspin.
[Guest]: So I was brought in a procession after we won the championship from the ground to the
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: So from a frightened young kid in an environment which he can't relate with and fearful, I
[Guest]: suddenly became a hero in the school.
[Guest]: I mean, there was, I went in, the principal called me and they said, oh, we have won the
[Guest]: championship.
[Guest]: Holiday was announced and my name was taken in the podium next day that he helped us win.
[Guest]: So obviously that, but fortunately or unfortunately, small town, I mean, once we shifted to Amritsar,
[Guest]: which was a bigger place with the Amarnath brothers and Madanlal in college teams and
[Guest]: some of very good players of the region playing, I just, I chickened out.
[Guest]: I thought that I can't, you know what happens, this whole complexity or complex of inferiority
[Guest]: complex comes in and I almost gave up, but yet my love of cricket and another thing which
[Guest]: fuelled that love of cricket was radio, which was, I remember this Amritsar, my grandfather,
[Guest]: my mother's father, parents, he was there, he was working in customs like my father and
[Guest]: must have been 60 because this was the Jasupatel's wicket-taking spell in which we defeated Australia
[Guest]: for the first time.
[Guest]: So that commentary, like, no, we used to, we used to go to buy something and then look
[Guest]: for a paanwala where the radio was on and there used to be a huge gathering listening
[Guest]: to the commentary.
[Guest]: So that love of the game came from radio.
[Guest]: It was, as you were saying, I mean, we had not seen those cricketers, we didn't even
[Guest]: know how they looked like, but in our imagination, we had like created those figures larger than
[Guest]: life, larger than like great heroes and that's how the love of the game at that time people
[Amit Varma]: fell in love with that game.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's this passage of, you know, when you're in Amritsar, you mentioned what
[Amit Varma]: a big deal it was to see a West Indies versus North Zone game and you pointed out a couple
[Amit Varma]: of things there which I found charming and one was that because you didn't know the players,
[Amit Varma]: you were listening to radio commentary simultaneously and Tony Cozier was on and his commentary
[Amit Varma]: was so good that you said that it was like he was describing what would happen and then
[Amit Varma]: it happened, which is such a lovely way of sort of, you know, he was setting the scene
[Guest]: and then...
[Guest]: I mean, this is true.
[Guest]: The way he would and a lot of those other commentators I discovered would anticipate
[Guest]: through the batsman's actions or this thing that you would actually feel that how did
[Guest]: he like know that this fellow is going to come forward, he's going to go back or this
[Guest]: fellow's fielding is outstanding because it would, the action would unfold after what
[Guest]: he had spoken.
[Guest]: It really happened like that.
[Amit Varma]: So it was amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And just a little nugget for listeners who have never been inside a press box, you know,
[Amit Varma]: press box in my days of covering cricket, it was just the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: So what would happen is that you could be typing something and action happens and then
[Amit Varma]: the television shows it a couple of seconds late because there's a delay and that's useful
[Amit Varma]: for someone who's writing a piece because you don't want to miss the action.
[Amit Varma]: But the moment you hear a crowd scream, you can just look at the TV and it's like, well,
[Amit Varma]: you see it fresh.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing besides this Tony Cozier comment that you mentioned, the other thing
[Amit Varma]: was that it was an educative experience for you to see the West Indies team fielding,
[Amit Varma]: because they seem to the moment the batsman would, you know, begin his footwork, they
[Amit Varma]: would anticipate where he's going to hit the ball or what shot he's going to play, and
[Amit Varma]: they would start moving.
[Amit Varma]: And this got me to thinking about, as viewers, how we learn about the game.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think what happened was that when the television revolution really happened
[Amit Varma]: in the 90s, and satellite television came in, I think there was not just a boom in watching
[Amit Varma]: cricket, but there was a boom in understanding cricket in term, because you had so many commentators
[Amit Varma]: who are ex cricketers, talk about the values of the game that this is what he's doing.
[Amit Varma]: And this is why he's doing and see this is a technique and look at the running between
[Amit Varma]: wickets and look at the fitness.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what happens is that those values then percolate down to all the young
[Amit Varma]: players of tomorrow, who then are much fitter, much better, the basics are more right.
[Amit Varma]: And what is of course, today happened is that the IPL actually turbocharged this.
[Amit Varma]: So the levels of fitness that you see and everything are just way higher in the current
[Amit Varma]: generation and part of it is incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But part of it is also how they are consuming cricket, which because they are getting everything
[Amit Varma]: in real time, they are seeing every shot, every action from multiple angles, they can
[Amit Varma]: go on YouTube and watch it again and again, or Hotstar and watch replays and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in our time, that wasn't the case.
[Amit Varma]: You couldn't, you know, you learned about the world in dribbles, not just cricket, but
[Amit Varma]: the world you learned about the world in dribbles, and you learned sort of whatever you could.
[Amit Varma]: And so as you know, what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've lived through and written through, in a sense, all these eras.
[Guest]: Well, now you say this, I started thinking that what if I had been watching those matches
[Guest]: live on television, like this one match I saw live, changed my whole orientation to
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: You know, what was to, how does one feel, how does one bat correctly, I realized that
[Guest]: and it helped me immensely.
[Guest]: Imagine now watching every day, the best cricketers in the world in front of you.
[Guest]: And as a kid, it's what an education it must be.
[Guest]: No wonder we have such large number of players.
[Guest]: I mean, India will probably make four, five, six, seven international teams, that's a number
[Guest]: of people who watch play.
[Guest]: And if you go to ground, if you take a look around, everyone who's playing wherever he's
[Guest]: playing, he's playing correct cricket, because they watched it.
[Guest]: In our times, it wasn't like that, we didn't even know like, I remember in the school,
[Guest]: I when I was batting, I remember this, this quite interesting, actually, since you talk
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: I had never faced a fastball, I was just seventh, eighth and there was this guy, we were matting,
[Guest]: I went to bat, and these short balls outside the outstump.
[Guest]: Now, I in my life had never seen the ball bounce so much.
[Guest]: And I didn't know how to play that.
[Guest]: Because I had not seen anyone bowl like that.
[Guest]: And actually, I, I had to like, figure out, ask people that how does one play this ball?
[Guest]: I didn't know that there was a stroke to leave or to cut or because I had not watched it.
[Guest]: If I had at that, today's kid has watched these things, how to play, how to bat in these
[Guest]: kinds of circumstances or conditions right from when, right from their memory started.
[Guest]: So imagine the kind of training they are getting, which which is good.
[Guest]: It's good that so many people are watching it live and learning the game, learning it
[Guest]: properly through watching the best players in action.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to propose a controversial sort of just thinking aloud, I'd like to propose
[Amit Varma]: a controversial statement, which I already know you'll disagree with, but just to throw
[Amit Varma]: it out there, which is that one, because your ecosystem is so much wider today, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, many more people have access to the game and are affluent enough to play it
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And because the level of education is so incredible in terms of, you know, just learning about
[Amit Varma]: the game from so many sources, that therefore and not just in cricket, but perhaps every
[Amit Varma]: sport that every generation has to be the best generation there has ever been.
[Amit Varma]: So a batsman, so the best batsman in the world ever is very likely to be somebody who is
[Amit Varma]: playing now, because as you get younger, you kind of get better and better.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, your book is full of how much you you know, idealized with Richards and
[Amit Varma]: the way he played and you've got such beautiful descriptions of his batting and the impact
[Amit Varma]: it made on you.
[Amit Varma]: And there might be outliers from a previous generation who are at and who were at an incredible
[Amit Varma]: level.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the Bradman, Sobers, Richards, they have their own place.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, I would say that, you know, the quality of talent that is there in every
[Amit Varma]: sport just because of these factors, that you will have many more people who are able
[Amit Varma]: to afford the leisure time to actually play when they're kids, and who can actually afford
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And you have far more access to education and pedagogy and just you know, you'll find
[Amit Varma]: seven year olds who are playing cover drive with the elbow in the right position foot
[Amit Varma]: is moving perfectly all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, I would imagine that the quality of cricket that you see today is in absolute
[Amit Varma]: terms, way better than say what it would have been in the 60s or 70s.
[Amit Varma]: What's what's your response?
[Guest]: No, no, I agree.
[Guest]: I wouldn't disagree with this, the quality of batsmanship or bowling, maybe not as much
[Guest]: in bowling, maybe I mean, maybe you could go back because they used to play on tracks
[Guest]: which are not covered.
[Guest]: So the more difficult to this thing, see the fitness levels have improved techniques have
[Guest]: not only improved, but people have rediscovered that it's not necessary to have one technique
[Guest]: to to in our times, anyone playing across the line would be hanged.
[Guest]: In today's time playing across the line as long as you're succeeding is a wonderful
[Guest]: shot.
[Guest]: Yes, see the another way to look at it is that had anyone, any great player, good players
[Guest]: of any generation would have been good players wherever they were.
[Guest]: If today we think Virat Kohli or Sachin Tendulkar is a brand man, a brand man had been born
[Guest]: today because of see these cricketers have been given conditions, access, which those
[Guest]: people didn't have.
[Guest]: It's not as if they they're born in a vacuum, they're playing in a vacuum.
[Guest]: So to compare, say a Bradman with Tendulkar and say Tendulkar fit more this thing better
[Guest]: would be I think a wrong way to look at it because Bradman didn't have Tendulkar's support,
[Guest]: which Tendulkar has or Virat has or any anyone Ricky Ponting has.
[Guest]: So things change, techniques, see a different way to look at it is let's pick up tennis.
[Guest]: Now to think that anyone can play like Nadal or Djokovic or Federer in the earlier era
[Guest]: when you watch with wooden rackets.
[Guest]: So you think that all these guys are so superior, why are we saying that those guys were as
[Guest]: great?
[Guest]: And they were as great because they were playing in conditions which were provided to them
[Guest]: in that they were the best.
[Guest]: So if they were to reborn today in these conditions, they would also be as good as they were then.
[Guest]: So that's why comparing one generation to another generation is very difficult and judgment
[Guest]: should be made by watching them and saying, Oh, look, this fellow is far superior.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a point I sometimes make in the context of writing, like I remember in one
[Amit Varma]: of my, I teach an online course on writing and a participant in one of my cohorts asked
[Amit Varma]: me that, why are writers of the 19th century or 18th century so boring?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, the question he asked me was, you respect Adam Smith and John Locke so much,
[Amit Varma]: but their prose is so turgid.
[Amit Varma]: And my point is that look, today, we are surrounded by all the books in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And there has been, you know, this evolution in the way people write, that our values have
[Amit Varma]: evolved along with that, how to write crisp prose, how to structure a piece, all of that,
[Amit Varma]: we have so many examples to choose from, our learning is much better.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're writing in the 18th century, there is so little literature around you,
[Amit Varma]: and you have so little access to most of it, that you it's almost like you're writing sui
[Amit Varma]: generi, right, you're having to make it up as you go along, almost like you playing that
[Amit Varma]: short ball on a matting wicket in the nets when you've never seen before.
[Amit Varma]: So given those restrictions to see the kind of writing that a Locke or a Smith did, is
[Amit Varma]: amazing.
[Amit Varma]: They are still incredibly lucid and cogent and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But they will, of course, they will sort of, you know, be different, they will sort of
[Amit Varma]: read differently.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a category error, even to compare a Bradman to a Tendulkar, or I would say even
[Amit Varma]: a Tendulkar to whoever the hot 18 year old at the moment is, because so much has just
[Amit Varma]: changed.
[Guest]: To compare Virat with Tendulkar, I mean, these are unfair comparison.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So there's another really interesting nugget that is there in your Panipat chapter, where
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how you would, you know, look at sports magazines or whatever, and you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, the pictures that would fascinate the most were those of white players, besides
[Amit Varma]: their outstanding performances, this could also have something to do with our subconsciously
[Amit Varma]: admiring their white skin.
[Amit Varma]: Even today, I remember the names of the Australian Paul Sheehan, the Englishman MJK Smith, or
[Amit Varma]: the New Zealander Graham Dowling, not because I remember any of their feats, but because
[Amit Varma]: of a fair, blue eyed, handsome, debonair young men in whites adorning the cover or the center
[Amit Varma]: spread of the magazine, battling these giants of the game were our puny Indians, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm again relating this to something that is been a broader thing in our society, that
[Amit Varma]: there is this almost postcolonial mindset, where we behave as if the white person is
[Amit Varma]: superior to us, right, like I remember, in my cricketing days, I was when I was the managing
[Amit Varma]: editor of Crick Info, I had gone to cover a game live with a colleague of mine who was
[Amit Varma]: from England.
[Amit Varma]: So he's white.
[Amit Varma]: So technically, in a sense, I'm, you know, senior to him and all that I'm his boss.
[Amit Varma]: But when we walk into the ground, you know, I am stopped and ask 1000 questions, but he's
[Amit Varma]: just waved on through, which is fine, but which reflects that sort of mindset, like
[Amit Varma]: in certain tourist spots, the way they speak to white people in the way they treat you,
[Amit Varma]: which is not how it happens in most of the rest of the world, where they'll treat everybody
[Amit Varma]: equally.
[Amit Varma]: And I see this sort of inferiority complex, even in the case of something like the development
[Amit Varma]: of the English language, like the reason, you know, so many of us speak in speak English
[Amit Varma]: or write English in suboptimal archaic ways, is I believe, because in India, English has
[Amit Varma]: been a marker of class, or a marker of where you stand in society, for all these decades.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to signal that you're socially superior to the people around you, you do
[Amit Varma]: it with your sophisticated English.
[Amit Varma]: And one way you do this is by optimizing for seeming sophistication by being too verbose.
[Amit Varma]: So instead of somebody say using a simple, beautiful word like stop, they'll say put
[Amit Varma]: an end to put an end to this pontificatory nonsense, you know, using five words where
[Amit Varma]: you could use one word, and and so on.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many examples of this, and the British have left these pomposities behind,
[Amit Varma]: you won't see them speaking like this or writing like this, but we still do it.
[Amit Varma]: And this complex has been there.
[Amit Varma]: And there is one narrative that which I broadly agree with, is that with liberalization and
[Amit Varma]: globalization and opening up to the world, we began to be more self confident and come
[Amit Varma]: out of it and assert ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: Some people look at you know, Ganguly opening a shirt at Lord's as a really good thing,
[Amit Varma]: a sign that we are not cowed down by them anymore, you know, we'll take them on and
[Amit Varma]: beat them and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But just as a broader sort of social thing, you know, is this something that we have come
[Amit Varma]: out of, it is behind us?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that still sort of bedevils us and still afflicts our society?
[Amit Varma]: Because even now, the validation of the white man seems so important, you will find our
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister respond much more, you know, negatively to something published in New York
[Amit Varma]: Times to something published in an Indian newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like that validation of the white man is still kind of important, where, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the films that win the Oscars are still, you know, at a pedestal compared to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what we might produce?
[Guest]: I think this is a very, very interesting question.
[Guest]: And my reason for including that was also the fact that I wanted to convey that in that
[Guest]: period, how we were like, no, we would adore like, we'll say, oh, white man, and in a conscious
[Guest]: and subconscious English willow and, and their pets and everything was like, we were like,
[Guest]: no, poor people, and under not only bad players, but, but, but maybe inferior culturally as
[Guest]: well in our minds, that was the kind of inferiority complex.
[Guest]: I think we have, we still may need their validation, we still may suffer from that kind of inferiority
[Guest]: complex, and I think that is the reflection of that I feel is that we have gone to other
[Guest]: extreme also, like we are, today we are like, like there is in this book, The Guardian,
[Guest]: I think it was The Guardian correspondent who was in Bombay, and this is, I think, David's
[Guest]: 100th Test match, and we all are there at the ground.
[Guest]: And as you were mentioning that people are, if they see a white skinned man, the police
[Guest]: will say go, now, there, this man also is being hassled, and he's, he's part of our
[Guest]: entourage and he's being pushed around.
[Guest]: And he says that, look, 10 years back or 20 years back, this was my white skin was a passport
[Guest]: or pass for me to enter anywhere in India, today, India's changed, they will lynch me.
[Guest]: So, so this reverse kind of a mentality, you know, we, we have to, if, if we think that
[Guest]: we have, we are now a self confident, confident, assertive nation, then we have to reach a
[Guest]: stage where we treat them with as much respect and dignity as any human being deserves.
[Guest]: And if they if we feel there's something wrong, we react with, with respect and with dignity
[Guest]: not like will kill you and who are you and you cheated us and I think this kind of a
[Guest]: discourse reflects again our inferiority, I feel, I may be wrong, it reflects a kind
[Guest]: of a that inferiority complex, which says that, okay, you treated me badly now, since
[Guest]: I have, I've reached a stage where I have, I have money, I have a space in, in the world,
[Guest]: I will also treat you badly.
[Guest]: What does it reflect?
[Guest]: I don't think it reflects good on our part.
[Guest]: I think, as I was saying earlier, also, okay, fine, you, you people, it's, it's individuals,
[Guest]: as we are saying, the abstract and the concrete individuals will be some may be good, some
[Guest]: may be bad, but to, to interact with the abstract becomes a whole different world.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about this journey from sort of playing cricket to thinking that you could
[Amit Varma]: write about it, like cricket at one point, you mentioned that you after being initially
[Amit Varma]: intimidated by the scene in Amritsar, you I think even when you moved to Chandigarh,
[Guest]: you got back to playing again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I played for my campus team.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you were a swashbuckling stroke player, was it?
[Guest]: I was a little bit both bowler and a batsman, bit of both.
[Amit Varma]: Incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And, and then you had a back injury and you kind of stopped playing and all of that.
[Guest]: A great loss for cricket, but not for cricket journalism.
[Amit Varma]: So were you always interested in writing, or is it something that, but serendipitously,
[Amit Varma]: it happened that you got that chance and we'll speak about how you got into it also.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, before that, would you read a lot?
[Amit Varma]: Would you think I want to write?
[Guest]: Was that something that sort of?
[Guest]: I had never imagined or thought about myself to, to become a journalist, to become a writer.
[Guest]: I was like, like most of the students around me, wondering what, I mean, you get into BA
[Guest]: graduate because karna hi hai, my parents, like any other parents wanted me to do, become
[Guest]: a doctor, but I wasn't a good enough student.
[Guest]: I would hardly get pass marks.
[Guest]: So it was at that stage, Shekhar, Shekhar happened to be with me in school.
[Guest]: And then I met Shekhar again in the university and he, he already was thinking of becoming
[Guest]: a journalist.
[Guest]: He had done his journalism course.
[Guest]: He was freelancing and then Express opened its edition in 78 in Chandigarh and he straight
[Guest]: away got a job and then he pulled me in and then Prabhat Joshi was the writer.
[Guest]: We watched cricket together as I described in the book.
[Guest]: So my getting into journalism was sheer connection.
[Guest]: I mean, I do realize when I look back that when I, these days when journalism students
[Guest]: probably come from journalism schools, they appear in tests and in my case and in most
[Guest]: of my generation, I think they happened to come into journalism because they knew someone.
[Guest]: Somebody's father was there.
[Guest]: So his son became a journalist.
[Guest]: So no, I had never even, I could never, I look back.
[Guest]: I just think it's a miracle that was Shekhar my classmate in school and he happened to
[Guest]: meet me in the university.
[Guest]: Was it some kind of a miracle that, that some destiny wanted me to become a journalist because
[Amit Varma]: I had never even thought about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you've described about how, you know, there was some series and you and Shekhar and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, other people would go to this place to watch television and Prabhat Joshi, who
[Amit Varma]: was Indian Express, Indian Express, a resident editor started chatting with you about cricket
[Amit Varma]: and then said, okay, do you want to join me?
[Amit Varma]: I'm, you know, hiring a couple of writers and that's how it happened.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me that how it's so, how so many things are so contingent and it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: happen like if you're in a different class or a different school and you never meet Shekhar,
[Amit Varma]: this sort of never happens.
[Amit Varma]: Have you ever thought about the counterfactual?
[Amit Varma]: Like what would you have been in those days?
[Amit Varma]: Where did you think life was taking you and how would it have?
[Guest]: Look, I was, I was, I mean, I don't remember how much worried I was.
[Guest]: My parents must have been, I was, I was just enrolled in MA Literature, this thing.
[Guest]: It was not as if that was my passion.
[Guest]: And I was planning something big that I will become a professor or a teacher.
[Guest]: And I was just thinking of enrolling, trying to look at bank exams, you see.
[Guest]: Those days, I think banking jobs were important.
[Guest]: Somewhere in LIC or bank or anywhere where you could get a job, I was, I was thinking
[Guest]: about should, when to apply and I was also worried thinking that I'm not, I didn't have
[Guest]: the confidence.
[Guest]: I'm not good enough to, my math was like a lot of people's maths is very bad.
[Guest]: And in those exams, your maths should be good.
[Guest]: So I was worried, wondering what to do, what not to do.
[Guest]: And I probably, if I had not met Shekhar, if I had not gone into journalism because
[Guest]: of these connections or sheer chance happened, I would have been a bank clerk or something
[Guest]: maybe through promotions.
[Guest]: Maybe I retired as senior officer or I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, reading your book, there is one moment which really startled me because
[Amit Varma]: something that happened to you also indirectly changed the course of my life, which is that
[Amit Varma]: you were in the early 2000s, you were being considered for the role of the editor of the
[Amit Varma]: Wisden magazine, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you almost got it.
[Amit Varma]: But then at that final interview stage, you didn't get it.
[Amit Varma]: And the person who got it was Sambit Bal, started Wisden Asia Cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And and I joined Sambit.
[Amit Varma]: And what happened was before that in the 90s, my experience was television, Channel V and
[Amit Varma]: MTV.
[Amit Varma]: And then I tried to do a startup around 2000.
[Amit Varma]: But Nasdaq crashed, everything collapsed.
[Amit Varma]: And so I had nothing and nowhere to go.
[Amit Varma]: But I happen to know Sambit.
[Amit Varma]: So the same connection thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: You happen to know Shekhar.
[Amit Varma]: So I happen to know Sambit.
[Amit Varma]: So I got a job working with him.
[Amit Varma]: And then we bought Crickinfo and all of that sort of happened.
[Amit Varma]: And so I don't know what direction my life would have gone in and what else I would have
[Amit Varma]: done.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have a counterfactual.
[Amit Varma]: But I can guarantee you that it would have gone in a different direction.
[Amit Varma]: But just the events, you know, it's a set of dominoes.
[Guest]: So the set of dominoes would go in some other direction.
[Guest]: You know, something very interesting, what you're saying, I'll add to it.
[Guest]: I was in Chandigarh and Rohit Mahajan, who's the Tribune Sports editor, who helped me in
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: He saw the manuscript and this thing.
[Guest]: So we were there, it's only 15 days, fortnight back.
[Guest]: And we started laughing.
[Guest]: And he said that, look, if Shekhar had not met you, you wouldn't have become a journalist.
[Guest]: And if you had not become a journalist, there are so many people whom you hired or you were
[Guest]: connected with, they also would have suffered.
[Guest]: So this is a chain.
[Guest]: These are all chain reactions, which you don't know what connection, where and how.
[Guest]: And actually, one doesn't even know what the alternate would have been.
[Guest]: Would have been far better.
[Guest]: I mean, how does one know?
[Guest]: One doesn't know.
[Guest]: You also wouldn't know that.
[Guest]: You are happy with what you are doing.
[Guest]: That's why you feel that.
[Guest]: But if you are not happy with what you are doing, you might have thought that, oh, what
[Guest]: my bad luck.
[Guest]: Why did I know this man?
[Guest]: He got me here.
[Guest]: No, I would have thought that, oh, Shekhar, I wish I had not met Shekhar there.
[Guest]: I'm so unhappy in this profession, which I was.
[Guest]: See at one point when I am in Delhi, I mean, I believe that I will be going to become the
[Guest]: sports editor there, which they don't make it.
[Guest]: I am so miserable and unhappy.
[Guest]: And that's the stage where I might have been thinking that why did I come into this profession?
[Amit Varma]: You're damn Shekhar Gupta.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, no, it's interesting how, you know, little things, it's like a butterfly flies
[Amit Varma]: its wings and suddenly the weather in another country is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's, of course, sort of overstating it, but that's, it's, it's, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So I read that little bit and I said, oh, my God, because I didn't know you, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm never joining Wisdom because I don't know you.
[Amit Varma]: I happen to know Sambit and he used to edit Gentleman and another magazine and I had written
[Amit Varma]: for them also.
[Amit Varma]: So there was some kind of connection.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, I am going on a completely different path.
[Amit Varma]: And who knows where it takes me.
[Amit Varma]: And so it's really interesting to sort of, I think, reflecting like this on these accidents
[Amit Varma]: of life should make all of us humble.
[Amit Varma]: Because whatever good has happened, it means so much luck is involved in the things that
[Guest]: have happened to you.
[Guest]: We live in an interdependent world.
[Guest]: You are dependent on me, I am dependent on you, we nobody, no individual is operating
[Guest]: in a vacuum.
[Guest]: If anyone thinks that things are happening because of him or her is living in some kind
[Guest]: of a world which doesn't exist, unless we realize this interdependence.
[Guest]: And this is again, I've learned from Buddhism, because for them, this is a very, very, the
[Guest]: most important concept is interdependence.
[Guest]: This interdependence has to be understood in its proper context to make you realize
[Guest]: that be humble.
[Guest]: You are nothing on your own, you are nothing, you're empty.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, if for all the listeners, if you're listening to this, why don't you pause,
[Amit Varma]: take a few moments, think about the accidents in your life, that, you know, got you to wherever
[Amit Varma]: you are, it could be a good place, it could be a bad place.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, one of the, one of the things I learned from my years playing poker,
[Amit Varma]: one of the learnings I took out is that in our lives, we underestimate the role of luck
[Amit Varma]: massively, you know, good things happen to us.
[Amit Varma]: And we let it get to our heads.
[Amit Varma]: We think, I am so good, I am so talented, and we become arrogant, or bad things happen
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: And we let it, you know, get us down.
[Amit Varma]: And we think, you know, instead of realizing that most of what happens to us is luck, right
[Amit Varma]: from where we are born to the genes we have to the circumstances we are in, to meeting
[Guest]: Shekhar Gupta in school.
[Amit Varma]: And to keep meeting him again and again in different cities.
[Amit Varma]: So there's just, you know, so much of luck, and that's a humbling thought.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we'll, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And when on the other side of it, we'll, you know, get back to your fascinating journey
[Amit Varma]: through journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, the art of clear writing,
[Amit Varma]: an online community has now sprung up of all my past students, we have workshops, a newsletter
[Amit Varma]: to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: It's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm having a delightful conversation with Pradeep magazine, and we've just sort of covered
[Amit Varma]: his life to the point where, you know, where you've joined journalism.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what's interesting is that all the other journalists have spoken before you
[Amit Varma]: on the show spoken to before you on the show, have wanted to be writers from the start.
[Amit Varma]: So they will be like, I used to read so and so, and I used to try reading this, writing
[Amit Varma]: this and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, in a sense, is your love of cricket, and it's your, you know, sort
[Amit Varma]: of the circumstances and everything which take you into writing about cricket.
[Amit Varma]: So in that early phase, where you're being a journalist, how do you sort of learn to
[Amit Varma]: be a journalist?
[Amit Varma]: Because right now, somebody who's getting into journalism now, you have the world's
[Amit Varma]: journalism available to you, you have journalism courses online available to you, you have
[Amit Varma]: how to videos available to you, you can watch videos about writing, you can do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But back in the day, we didn't have all of this again, everything would come in drips
[Amit Varma]: and drabs.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your notion of journalism, and how do you begin then, to learn the values
[Amit Varma]: of journalism, what is a good practice, what is not a good practice, are there any role
[Amit Varma]: models you have, or people who impress you?
[Guest]: You see, when I got into journalism, maybe my I see when you're young, especially when
[Guest]: you haven't entered the adult world of jobs, and I was an idealist, like, I'm sure like
[Guest]: my friends and other like, like, they're always these as a student, these values of wrong
[Guest]: right are very strong in you.
[Guest]: I guess they were in me as well.
[Guest]: I got introduced to since I was doing English literature, so I was at least reading books
[Guest]: which were fixed on the like, Dickens or Shakespeare studies, and though I was a bad student, but
[Guest]: at least the living impressions in my mind I was.
[Guest]: And so I had this, I think, strong, strong beliefs in right values and right values in
[Guest]: the sense that you should be objective, though, the understanding of objectivity is changed
[Guest]: no matter how objective you can be, one always comes from a point of view.
[Guest]: When I joined, I realized that my language skills were bad.
[Guest]: I mean, my mind may have been involved with a lot of different things, but my writing
[Guest]: skills weren't good.
[Guest]: First thing I did was I tried to find out what book can I read to understand the game
[Guest]: better because I realized that unless you are on top of your subject, and that you should
[Guest]: know the technique, I had played cricket, but that doesn't mean the level of cricket
[Guest]: I played wasn't that high.
[Guest]: But even that doesn't guarantee your understanding of its technicalities.
[Guest]: The book I read was Don Bredman's Art of Coaching.
[Guest]: I mean, that was the book at that time, everyone.
[Guest]: Art of Cricket.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So I read that book, it changed my whole writing style also, because I got into the technique
[Guest]: of cricket far more seriously, which I hadn't done as a student of the game.
[Guest]: It was like, go and play at the nets and if somebody offers you an advice, you take it.
[Guest]: Then I realized Times of India had Ray Robinson writing in it.
[Guest]: I got deeply influenced by, because I found that economy of words, I mean, there used
[Guest]: to be a four, five, six paragraph report and he used to say so much in that limited space.
[Guest]: It was an amazing experience and I started copying him.
[Guest]: I mean, I realized that I had based my writing style on Ray Robinson.
[Guest]: It was impossible to copy him.
[Guest]: I wasn't good enough.
[Guest]: My language wasn't my forte, but I started trying to be precise and condense.
[Guest]: So these are two people, Bradman's book and Ray Robinson's writings, which helped me to
[Guest]: write better.
[Guest]: And maybe I used to reflect a lot also, because I would, like anyone else, read my reports
[Guest]: and only find errors in it, that why did I write like this, why I didn't write like this.
[Guest]: So I guess that's how I tried to improve my writing skills.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's what you said about, you know, reading your reports and always finding
[Amit Varma]: faults in it is something that I think all of us do consciously.
[Amit Varma]: And these days, like when I talk to my writing students, I talk about that process through
[Amit Varma]: the frame of thinking about one's writing facilities being divided into two things.
[Amit Varma]: And one is the ability to write and the other is a judgment of writing.
[Amit Varma]: So what when you write something and you read it and you think, oh, this is shit, what is
[Amit Varma]: happening is that your judgment is ahead of your ability at that point in time.
[Amit Varma]: But that's all.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a good thing, because it means that you keep working harder, your ability
[Amit Varma]: keeps catching up.
[Amit Varma]: So the more you read, and the more you write, the more your judgment evolves.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, with all the practice that you put in, your ability is catching
[Amit Varma]: up one step at a time.
[Amit Varma]: So it's actually an extremely useful process for a writer to look back at their work and
[Amit Varma]: not like it, because it means that judgment is evolving and the ability will kind of sort
[Amit Varma]: of get there, which is another reason I sort of tell my students that if you write something
[Amit Varma]: and you think it's rubbish, you know, that is not a reason to stop writing and to beat
[Amit Varma]: yourself up and say, oh, mujhe nahi aata, mere se nahi hoga.
[Amit Varma]: That is actually a reason to continue, because it means that your judgment is evolving.
[Amit Varma]: And it always evolves quicker than your ability itself.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a question of putting in the work and the ability catches up.
[Amit Varma]: And Ray Robinson is a great model, like the other, you know, I often contrast Ray Robinson
[Amit Varma]: with someone like Neville Cardus.
[Amit Varma]: And I find Neville Cardus too poetic and flowery and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and I think there's a danger for a young writer to try to be like Cardus.
[Amit Varma]: I would be like, if you just go for economy of prose, like you said, chaar para mein
[Amit Varma]: itna kuch bol diya.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and Robinson is sort of a great example of that.
[Amit Varma]: What is the journalism world like in terms of, you know, the hierarchies and the kind
[Amit Varma]: of things you're allowed to cover, like you have a very interesting story before you became
[Amit Varma]: a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when Shekhar was a journalist, where he went to, he was covering this tennis tournament
[Amit Varma]: in which Ramnathan Krishnan and Ramesh Krishnan, who was in a young teenager, were both playing.
[Amit Varma]: And he covered the whole tournament to the point they reached the final.
[Amit Varma]: And he knew it was going to be a front page story.
[Amit Varma]: He was very excited.
[Amit Varma]: Father versus son in the final.
[Amit Varma]: And he goes there.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, then he sees the sort of the resident editor or the sports editor R.
[Amit Varma]: Sreeman walking in.
[Amit Varma]: And he realizes that shit, that guy is going to write the report.
[Amit Varma]: And that guy also had good reasons because R. Sreeman had seen Ramnathan play with his
[Amit Varma]: father many years back.
[Amit Varma]: Toh waha bhi narrative aag toh hai hi.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, poor Shekhar, the young journalist misses out.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember, you know, when I entered cricket journalism with Sambit's team back in the
[Amit Varma]: early 2000s, and I remember I was with a bunch of, you know, I had a bunch of young colleagues
[Amit Varma]: like myself, like Rahul Bhattacharya, and a bunch of us later on, you know, Sidhvi,
[Amit Varma]: who you mentioned in the book, Anand Vasu, who you mentioned in your book.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember at one point, I sensed this resentment from the older journalists who
[Amit Varma]: were in their 40s or 50s.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them who used to work for a news agency, one day took me aside and said, you
[Amit Varma]: know what ki, I started as a stringer in this news agency, then I worked with this big newspaper,
[Amit Varma]: it took me 12 years before before I was allowed to cover an India cricket match.
[Amit Varma]: Because first you're covering your local tennis match, your local this your local dad, you
[Amit Varma]: move up the ranks to be able to cover an actual match by India is such a big privilege.
[Amit Varma]: And you have to do so much to get there.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, there are these young whippersnapper kids like myself who are like too oversmart,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: You think the word of yourself, because you haven't seen enough of it.
[Amit Varma]: And and you're immediately covering test cricket and you're like sitting in press box and being
[Amit Varma]: a hero.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that journey like through journalism for you?
[Guest]: See, when I started international cricket, wasn't that much there, no, the Ranji cricket
[Guest]: was huge.
[Guest]: You read stories, even interclub matches used to get huge treatment.
[Guest]: So this aspiration to straightway become an international reporter, in the sense to write
[Guest]: on India matches, wasn't there that much because opportunities were very few and far and used
[Guest]: to get your proper bylines by covering Ranji cricket.
[Guest]: A, B, there was also this feeling, which was among all my colleagues when I was young that
[Guest]: there are these seniors who cover almost everything on their own, be it Olympic Games, there used
[Guest]: to, I mean, there were no specialists.
[Guest]: Right now you have like somebody's covering cricket, somebody's, they're different people.
[Guest]: In my period, it wasn't like that.
[Guest]: I think the sports editor or whoever was senior and had greater access would cover everything.
[Guest]: They go to, R. Sharimaan has covered, would cover World Hockey, would cover Olympic Games,
[Guest]: would cover cricket series, though Times of India had K. N. Prabhu, who was probably more
[Guest]: senior than him.
[Guest]: And so there was this hierarchy was there and it was difficult to break that hierarchy.
[Guest]: So I'm again, I would consider myself lucky that I was in Chandigarh, which wasn't the
[Guest]: main centre for Indian Express, Express was in Delhi and yet I started getting, people
[Guest]: thought maybe I write well.
[Guest]: I think more important than that was that, see, journalists used to have an annual gathering,
[Guest]: get together or there was a federation and they used to organise interzonal cricket tournaments.
[Guest]: So I, since I had played a bit of cricket, I was a major star for North Zone in that
[Guest]: period.
[Guest]: So I helped them a few times win the championship.
[Guest]: That actually probably played an equally important role in other people accepting that this cricket
[Guest]: plays well, so give it a chance, even the office thought.
[Guest]: So those things, I think I was lucky to get those breaks.
[Guest]: But there was a very strong hierarchy, very strong hierarchy, which is less now.
[Guest]: I mean, there would be more heartburns now because there are more people, more, I would
[Guest]: say the quality of journalism today, unfortunately, maybe print is not giving, providing enough
[Guest]: space is far better than it was during my time.
[Guest]: There are people who are trained, who have done proper studies, they are not people like
[Guest]: me who just happened to get a job and become a journalist, the people who aspired for it,
[Guest]: trained for it, they are better writers, but there may be greater heartburns because they
[Guest]: are better writers and their numbers are high.
[Guest]: So they compete with each other, younger people get chances to cover international cricket.
[Guest]: So maybe that is there.
[Guest]: But at the same time, for me to say that in our times, things were wonderful would be
[Guest]: very wrong, wrong perception or wrong, convey a wrong, wrong thing.
[Guest]: No, it wasn't.
[Guest]: It wasn't.
[Guest]: People were, we were all like upset all the time, like, look, we don't get chances.
[Guest]: I would get a chance to cover a Ranji game outside Punjab because Faridabad happened
[Guest]: to be in Haryana, but though close to Delhi.
[Guest]: So even going to Faridabad, my getting a Ranji game was a big deal for me.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another beautiful passage I want to read out from sort of from your book, where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, until the 80s, publications use metal typesetting, the operator or typesetter
[Amit Varma]: keyed in the stories from the journalist typed copy with editing marks.
[Amit Varma]: The Linotype machine created a mold of each line of type using lead, and these were assembled
[Amit Varma]: into the various pages of the newspaper by a page maker, a specialised job under the
[Amit Varma]: supervision of the subeditor or the chief subeditor.
[Amit Varma]: It was a difficult job, but it was made to look easy by this skill.
[Amit Varma]: From today's perspective, where technology has made the job so easy that the same person
[Amit Varma]: can write, edit and make the page, the work these guys were doing seems impossibly hard.
[Amit Varma]: The monotony of editing a piece, giving it a headline, then proofreading the manually
[Amit Varma]: typeset copy, and finally supervising the page making would take about 10 to eight hours,
[Amit Varma]: stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not reading this out only out of a sense of nostalgia or to tell people today
[Amit Varma]: that hey, you have it so easy and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I also want to sort of then think about how the process shapes the work that you do.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think the big advantage of say, being able to sit down and just type out a report
[Amit Varma]: and hit enter and it is published immediately and people can read it means a number of different
[Amit Varma]: things where on the negative side of the ledger, it means that you don't perhaps take as much
[Amit Varma]: care as you normally would, if you were, you know, going through this entire process, writing
[Amit Varma]: one piece in eight days, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, on the positive side of the ledger, what it means is that you're
[Amit Varma]: getting much more writing done, all these little points of friction have vanished, you
[Amit Varma]: can just focus on the actual craft of the writing or the storytelling.
[Amit Varma]: And because you're getting much more of it, you're getting better at it much faster.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's kind of, it's just something that I think about that, you know, when I
[Amit Varma]: first started writing, it was by hand, and then I used a typewriter for a little while
[Amit Varma]: and then computers happened.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, it seems there are different processes, when I'm writing by hand, you know, it is
[Amit Varma]: much slower, it can't go at the speed of my thought.
[Amit Varma]: When I'm writing by a typewriter, there is still a consideration that has to go into
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Because there is no backspace.
[Amit Varma]: If I make a typo, or I change my mind, I can't just backspace it and write it again.
[Amit Varma]: The computer is a different process.
[Amit Varma]: You've been through all of this from writing with hand by typing stuff and somehow finding
[Amit Varma]: a place, whatever, you know, all the technologies, do you feel that the process itself also then
[Amit Varma]: changes the kind of work that you're able to do?
[Amit Varma]: You know, just in terms of something is more considered and thoughtful, or something can
[Amit Varma]: be longer, for example, when you're writing for the internet, the great advantage is the
[Amit Varma]: advantage of space, you don't have to be four paragraphs or five paragraphs or a Robinson,
[Amit Varma]: you can be longer if you feel it justified.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on the different ways in which form has evolved and how that's
[Amit Varma]: affected your work?
[Guest]: Well, I think human beings have great capacity to adapt.
[Guest]: I mean, if I look back and reflect on your question, which I have done earlier, also,
[Guest]: I also used began by writing with hand I was not I, I learned once I got the job, I learned
[Guest]: a bit of typing in a typing school, but I think there is this lazy dog runs over the
[Guest]: which in which you can like all the keys, your 10 fingers use all the keys.
[Guest]: Typing I mean, at that time, one didn't think this as a disadvantage when one was doing
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But now looking back, obviously, typing has this huge disadvantage of not whatever you
[Guest]: have written, unless you change it, I mean, throw the paper and insert the paper if you
[Guest]: have made mistakes, or if you think no, the chain of thought is not okay.
[Guest]: See, the computer has this huge advantage of you can write first, and then readjust
[Guest]: paragraphs which were or redo them also, which is not possible while you were typing.
[Guest]: But that also meant that subconsciously, since you're aware that you can't afford to make
[Guest]: mistakes, you were more attentive to you were more because you know, you know that look,
[Guest]: it will be difficult for me to now I finished one page.
[Guest]: So let me be more thoughtful, let me think a bit more seriously before I start typing.
[Guest]: So I guess that training because of the requirement of what you're doing, because you can't keep
[Guest]: on throwing papers and it takes time and journalism is what it's like you have to meet a deadline.
[Guest]: It's a work in a hurry.
[Guest]: So yes, I think today's people have this great advantage.
[Guest]: I have this great advantage now if I write anything and it happened in I think the first
[Guest]: time I used a laptop was I think in for England tour in 96.
[Guest]: You had you sold your car to buy a laptop, you've mentioned that was in 97.
[Guest]: So here was this office laptop, I was in Express at that time.
[Guest]: And that's the first time and it was it was a wonder machine.
[Guest]: I mean, you would wonder that look, I can do anything.
[Guest]: I can like write a para and change it and without bothering about the typewriter, it
[Guest]: will make less noise also it look mostly can and it saved a lot of time and at the same
[Guest]: time since you were at such later age in the early 40s being introduced to a technology
[Guest]: which was widely different from your typewriter.
[Guest]: Typewriter was like a metallic machine which could pick up and throw laptop or something
[Guest]: which was which was so precise and so I mean, technically like no you felt that you have
[Guest]: to safeguard it and you're fearful also I would I remember that one would press a button
[Guest]: and say press the wrong button, the delete, we were not used to it, copies would vanish,
[Guest]: then you would be in panic.
[Guest]: So you'd always key in with a lot of fear that nothing should go wrong.
[Guest]: The copy shouldn't vanish, it happened with me a couple of times, you've written a report.
[Guest]: And obviously, now I know I'm much more technical, technically, laptop is likely using a typewriter
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So I knew I used to press say, delete, undo, not undo.
[Guest]: So you frantically search for some expert to tell you what to do, what not to do.
[Guest]: But yes, your writing skills obviously would be better, better because you spend less time
[Guest]: but do more.
[Guest]: It has changed.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I am saying that when you look back at people who have written at
[Guest]: that period, I'm sure if they were using laptop also the language would have been the same
[Guest]: because language is as you are saying, product of the times we live in.
[Guest]: It's not as if their language would have changed.
[Guest]: Maybe they might have become written more carefully with less attention but more care
[Guest]: because you have time, you can do faster.
[Guest]: But we adapt.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, when you talk about your wonder at seeing how a laptop functions, and I totally
[Amit Varma]: shared that, I think of this quote by Arthur C. Clarke, where he said, quote, any sufficiently
[Amit Varma]: advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that's how it seemed to us that, you know, and, you know, you mentioned in your book
[Amit Varma]: about how in 97, I think when you were in the Pioneer, you needed a laptop to go on
[Amit Varma]: this tour, and you actually you needed 30,000 rupees, you had to sell your car to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: raise the money for it.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember around that time, perhaps, and I wasn't a journalist, of course, I was
[Amit Varma]: working as a scriptwriter in television, but I badly wanted a laptop as well.
[Amit Varma]: Because in my office, I didn't have access to, you know, access to computers was not
[Amit Varma]: so smooth.
[Amit Varma]: I worked in channel V at the time, I remember, and we just had sort of one computer in the
[Amit Varma]: entire office.
[Amit Varma]: And it wasn't with the scriptwriters.
[Amit Varma]: It was with the PR department, you know, and we had to, there was this big political fight
[Amit Varma]: that we, you know, wanted to use it, but they would be very possessive of it.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so and something that we take so completely for granted today, like I cannot
[Amit Varma]: imagine sort of life without it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what's what you earlier sort of said, which I found really interesting is that you
[Amit Varma]: were sort of not someone who was very outgoing, kind of, you know, kept to yourself and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, until you started drinking.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, you have, you know, you talk about the sort of the cocktail parties
[Amit Varma]: that would happen with the press conferences and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this one hilarious story, in fact, which I really enjoyed about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in one of those parties, there is a guy who doesn't drink, a colleague who doesn't drink,
[Amit Varma]: who you find is on his sixth Bloody Mary.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go to him and he says, yeah, Pradeep, this is fantastic tomato juice.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also struck by this passage there, which I'll read out, where you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: with most of the journalists having several drinks, one would think that the next day's
[Amit Varma]: reports would have had factual inaccuracies.
[Amit Varma]: But this was rarely the case, or at least we believed so.
[Amit Varma]: Most of us had become experts at decoding match details from the scorecard, with live
[Amit Varma]: television coverage not reaching every home, and in any case absent from the games we covered,
[Amit Varma]: the facts were what we wrote on in the paper, even if on occasion, they may have been at
[Amit Varma]: variance with reality, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this also tells me like, you know, there was this Wisdom, of course, published almanacs,
[Amit Varma]: but they also published something called the Wisdom Book of Test Cricket in I think, 77-78.
[Amit Varma]: And my dad got us a copy of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it had all the Test Match scorecards until then.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, in that time, there weren't even that many Test Matches, so they could fit
[Amit Varma]: in one book.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember that one of my favorite activities was to sit there and go scorecard by scorecard
[Amit Varma]: and make stories in my head from whatever I could decipher from this thing.
[Amit Varma]: So that sense of, you know, you're doing that from the scorecard also, I mean, that's how
[Amit Varma]: we consume cricket at one point in time, right?
[Amit Varma]: There was no TV, no YouTube, no reports for most of those matches.
[Amit Varma]: That's what we did.
[Amit Varma]: But the question, therefore, is that how like one of the things that you used to be very
[Amit Varma]: disquieting for me when I was a journalist, the first thing I noticed as a young journalist
[Amit Varma]: in the press box, is that most of the people are not watching the cricket.
[Amit Varma]: You know, kabhi kuch aawaz aayegi toh they might look at the replay, but most of the
[Amit Varma]: people are not watching the cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember discussing this with a colleague that are we are cricket journalists, we're
[Amit Varma]: not even like kind of watching the game, right?
[Amit Varma]: And is this something that you saw and that you noticed because a lot of the journalism
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, then becomes kind of lazy where you, you know, ki shortcut le liya ki, you
[Amit Varma]: know, scorecard se you kind of figure out what happened and then you make up stuff around
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Like even that earlier example, R Sreeman walking into the Ramnathan Krishnan versus
[Amit Varma]: Ramesh Krishnan match and you point out that he missed most of the match, but he put together
[Amit Varma]: a report with a lot of flowery prose and with a lot of whatever from the bare facts without
[Amit Varma]: actually immersing himself.
[Amit Varma]: Is this a danger that journalists face that you become jaded?
[Amit Varma]: So you stop watching because initially, I guess, excitement bahut hai, you're watching
[Amit Varma]: every ball you're trying to maybe you're too excited, trying too hard to find narratives
[Amit Varma]: and stories in there.
[Amit Varma]: But is there a danger that later you get jaded, and you're just going through the motions
[Amit Varma]: and like these are the two sort of extremes you can go to?
[Guest]: Yeah, there is a danger I thought about writing about all these things about drinking about
[Guest]: I mean, I wanted to convey a picture of journalism, which was more truthful than this fancy dream
[Guest]: world you create that look, we worked hard and we knew the game and we were passionate
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: At least my experience, I'm narrating my experience, I'm not saying they weren't there.
[Guest]: In my experience, also, there were journalists who even then they were young, but probably
[Guest]: they didn't, they were there to they got a job and maybe they got a job like I did.
[Guest]: And then they were now not, not understanding the game or not working to understand the
[Guest]: game.
[Guest]: They would write cliches.
[Guest]: You see, when you write a match report from scorecard, you will write in cliches, no caught
[Guest]: behind, edged, slip a catch, edge, cover, mistime, you create a story out of cliches.
[Guest]: And since nobody is there to, today's reader, if you make mistakes in a print report of
[Guest]: a match will kill you, they'll write to your editor and you because they've seen the match,
[Guest]: they're saying what rubbish this man is.
[Guest]: In our time, that was a luxury, which not everyone took advantage of that luxury in
[Guest]: the sense that okay, kya farag padta nahi, dekha dekha.
[Guest]: And then if you are in press boxes, where drinks are being served, where that reporter
[Guest]: like the moment he realized that his tomato juice was laced with vodka, he suddenly felt
[Guest]: giddy and said, yo, I'm going home, I'll sleep because he realized that he may not be able
[Guest]: to write the report and he'll sleep properly and then make a report from the scorecard.
[Guest]: So this is a kind of dishonesty, which was prevalent of the specific periods I was involved
[Guest]: with in Chandigarh, which I may have also been guilty of.
[Guest]: My advantage was that I, unlike a lot of the others, I at least had played the game, even
[Guest]: if it was at a college level, I could instinctively at least basic errors I wouldn't make.
[Guest]: I mean, there are things which instinctively if you understand and know a game, you won't
[Guest]: make that mistake of, you know, it will register even if you're not watching it very carefully.
[Guest]: But it was wrong.
[Guest]: And yes, the danger of jadedness is, I have always wondered and especially wondered at
[Guest]: people who have, I used to, remained as cricket writers for 30-40 years, and I would marvel
[Guest]: at their capacity to have that concentration, that passion to watch a game carefully, because
[Guest]: there are people who do that.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm writing of, it's not like as if everyone is doing that.
[Guest]: I'm just writing of a specific period.
[Guest]: But there are wonderful writers who, even at later ages, you watch them, you just admire,
[Guest]: they just sit in the press box and keep on watching, and till the end, they don't move.
[Guest]: But there are people who get jaded, and they get so jaded that it's like, like they're
[Guest]: bored with.
[Guest]: The problem with doing something every day is that you get bored with that work.
[Guest]: And once you get bored with that work, you might take shortcuts, so it's okay, we'll
[Guest]: watch the replay, we'll ask someone, I'll trust someone.
[Guest]: The most you can do is, if you're clever and this thing, you will ask a person whom you
[Guest]: know has watched and understands the game.
[Guest]: You won't make the mistake of asking someone who, like you, hasn't watched also and doesn't
[Guest]: even understand the game.
[Guest]: At least you will do that to trust a person, you know that when you're writing, you won't
[Guest]: make a mistake.
[Guest]: But there is this, a lot of people get jaded.
[Guest]: I got jaded far early in my writing, because somehow maybe I was interested in so many
[Guest]: other things.
[Guest]: I mean, cricket wasn't for me, since I had just stayed into journalism.
[Guest]: Maybe cricket writing wasn't for me that be end of everything.
[Guest]: So I was interested in doing so many other things or that I got bored with match reports
[Guest]: very early in my life.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing that you seem never to have got bored with and that I think you did very
[Amit Varma]: well from what I remember of your journalism and what I see in the book are other human
[Amit Varma]: stories of actually talking to cricketers, the profiles that, you know, there you were,
[Amit Varma]: there's a much sort of greater engagement.
[Amit Varma]: So did that always, did that side of it always interest you?
[Guest]: And then I think I was probably more interested in understanding human nature and understanding.
[Guest]: And if you see in the book, my interactions with some of the top cricketers of that period,
[Guest]: which were common to people who are covering at that time, because the accessibility was
[Guest]: far greater, it was nothing special to me.
[Guest]: But I think I since I was more interested in a in human nature, be in not, not idealizing
[Guest]: cricketers like like the danger of being in journalism is that you, you basically you
[Guest]: are a fan.
[Guest]: You can't deny the fact that no matter how much you say that, no, I'm here as a professional,
[Guest]: we are fans, you know, we admire those skills, we, so beating a Tendulkar itself becomes
[Guest]: an event, whatever, whoever you may be, you may think you are a journalist, I keep my
[Guest]: distance.
[Guest]: I somehow very early in my life, lost that idealizing capacity, somehow, because I saw
[Guest]: them as as human beings, and I was more forthright and more like treating them like as equals,
[Guest]: which probably might have helped me in reconstructing those era because I write about say Ganguly
[Guest]: Dravid interactions or Chappell era, I see it from every perspective, I see it from Dravids,
[Guest]: I see from Ganguly, I even become a mediator kind of a thing I like, like maybe, maybe
[Guest]: my own distance from them, I would never, despite having known them in the sense that
[Guest]: if you read the book, it appear as if I was in friendly terms with them.
[Guest]: It wasn't like that.
[Guest]: I would keep my distance.
[Guest]: I would hardly like, no, try to see a lot of journalists try to follow a cricketer follow
[Guest]: a captain, seek his court, see his exclusive, keep on troubling him, give me an interview,
[Guest]: give me, I would never do that.
[Guest]: So maybe that helped me that whenever I approached them, they would take me a bit more seriously
[Guest]: than look, maybe my grey hair helped, because it's been grey since the last 30 years.
[Guest]: So I think maybe my training in a bit of English literature, my own, I was a great follower
[Guest]: of cinema.
[Guest]: I think one of the biggest influences on me when I was in the university was watching
[Guest]: Kurosawa's Rashomon Gate, I suddenly I couldn't sleep for days, because I suddenly realized
[Guest]: that, that to believe that there is one truth.
[Guest]: And here is this film showing you multiple truths and even then you don't know what the
[Guest]: truth is.
[Guest]: I mean, the same incident seen from say, four or five perspectives, and all the five perspectives
[Guest]: are different, the people, the person who's narrating that story becomes the hero in that
[Guest]: the saviour in that, or a good person, the rest are villains.
[Guest]: So everyone is a villain from multiple perspectives, and everyone is a hero.
[Guest]: So it disturbed me so much.
[Amit Varma]: And I actually caught a glimpse of this in, you know, when you write about what is happening
[Amit Varma]: between Dravid and Ganguly, for example, that Rashomon effect really comes in, because we
[Amit Varma]: are getting it from both sides, right?
[Amit Varma]: You're speaking to Ganguly, and you're speaking to Dravid, and you're getting all the different
[Amit Varma]: points of view in there, which I found was sort of beautifully done.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we'll, we'll, of course, talk about those sort of as well.
[Amit Varma]: But a follow up question on this, which is that, in your case, you're talking to both
[Amit Varma]: Ganguly and Dravid, and you're getting all those points of views, and you know, everybody
[Amit Varma]: and you're making that effort.
[Amit Varma]: But in many cases, I feel that access and what it can get you is a double edged sword.
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, you're getting insider dope, which you have no other way of knowing.
[Amit Varma]: So you're getting a deeper insight into what's actually happening.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, the incentives of access are that you don't want to piss off the person
[Amit Varma]: who's given you access.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you lose that access, you know, you are one step behind your competitors who
[Amit Varma]: might be able to talk to the person.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, you know, that can become a factor for some journalists where you can't
[Amit Varma]: then piss them off too much, your coverage has to be dictated by that.
[Amit Varma]: Like at one point, you're right in the 90s, that you were a little disheartened when Azhar
[Amit Varma]: was captain that Azhar only spoke to the small coterie of people around him.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, I remember in 2006, when we had gone to Pakistan, I was sort of blogging also
[Amit Varma]: at the same time while I was writing for the Guardian and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I blogged about was a Politburo and the Politburo was of course,
[Amit Varma]: a group of Bengali journalists who had access to Ganguly.
[Amit Varma]: And every story they would write would be from, you know, keeping Ganguly's interests
[Amit Varma]: in mind.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I remember a couple of them glaring at me and giving me angry looks at
[Amit Varma]: one point in time.
[Amit Varma]: But that aside, I think, what do you feel about these trade offs?
[Amit Varma]: And if there are young journalists listening to this, how should they navigate these trade
[Amit Varma]: offs?
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, it's good to get close to the subject.
[Amit Varma]: So you get insider info.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, one, that access is always conditional.
[Amit Varma]: And two, that access can bias you, you know, even if it is not, the access isn't conditional,
[Amit Varma]: because you're close to one person, you will subconsciously get biased towards that point
[Amit Varma]: of view.
[Amit Varma]: So what would your advice be to a young journalist and as an as a journalist yourself and as
[Amit Varma]: an editor supervising so many other journalists writing for you, how do you think this is
[Amit Varma]: best navigated?
[Guest]: I think the first lesson to be learned is to stop being a fan.
[Guest]: Try stop being a fan.
[Guest]: I'm saying that it's difficult because you are a fan.
[Guest]: That's why you come into the profession, you know.
[Guest]: Stop being a fan.
[Guest]: Tell yourself that you're dealing with the skills of these players.
[Guest]: Otherwise, they will, as human beings, they may be as good or bad.
[Guest]: They have a discipline in one, this thing, their skills are great in that discipline,
[Guest]: they become great players.
[Guest]: Second thing, this access, it's a very tricky thing because your newspaper, especially today's
[Guest]: newspapers or television, they demand access because you want to break stories.
[Guest]: Now access comes with this baggage of, then you have to, you become biased.
[Guest]: You have to please that person because otherwise he won't give you access.
[Guest]: Now, what do you do?
[Guest]: In my period, especially till the large chunk, even when I retired, maybe because I had been
[Guest]: part of the, when print was the king, I mean, print word meant everything.
[Guest]: There was a time when there was no TV.
[Guest]: So players used to rely on the print or selectors and everything to find out or to use the print
[Guest]: writing to even further their agenda.
[Guest]: Like this fellow, if they didn't like a player, say, you wrote in the report, you didn't play
[Guest]: well.
[Guest]: So, in my case, I learned my lesson early, which I describe in the book also, Kapil gives
[Guest]: me a big interview and then denies it later.
[Guest]: I was a young rookie reporter, it hurts my professional credibility.
[Guest]: But I also realized that don't be close to players.
[Guest]: I went to the other extreme at that time and I could do that.
[Guest]: I stopped being interacting with any player.
[Guest]: I mean, this kind of a thing went on till, I mean, interact with a captain or a player
[Guest]: only if it is strictly required at a professional level.
[Guest]: Otherwise, no, this thing that you like try to ingratiate yourself to him so that you
[Guest]: can get good stories or I stopped doing that.
[Guest]: It had its pitfalls, but somehow I survived.
[Guest]: I think another lesson which is very important to learn is you have to be good at your work.
[Guest]: I mean, the subject you're writing on, you have to be so good that even the people whom
[Guest]: you're writing about, look forward to reading you.
[Guest]: I mean, if you can do that, I mean, that's why you are in the profession, you are not
[Guest]: just writing for a reader, you are also writing for people who are playing that game.
[Guest]: They also like, they would also want to know what they have written.
[Guest]: And if your judgment of a game or of a player skills or of that day's innings or of a spell
[Guest]: is very close to what has happened from technical point of view, from the situation the match
[Guest]: is placed in, even the player, even if you have been critical of him, realizes that this
[Guest]: person is not coming from a perspective of bias.
[Guest]: He may even want to read it every day.
[Guest]: I want to read this man, what has he written about me?
[Guest]: What has he written about?
[Guest]: He may be learning from your writing.
[Guest]: If you can reach that stage, I mean, you get a different respect from those people.
[Guest]: Because they also, I mean, like their craft, you are also dealing with one craft.
[Guest]: So if you can become in that craft as good as the players are in their craft, you will
[Guest]: have a lot of respect, you will have, people will talk to you, even if you have been critical
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: I don't think there have been many journalists as critical of the establishment or even of
[Guest]: players as, I'm not like trying to praise myself, like it's not, I'm not coming from
[Guest]: that perspective.
[Guest]: But I have been a very, very, my opinions may have been wrong.
[Guest]: People may have said, what nonsense is he writing?
[Guest]: But there have been strong opinions.
[Guest]: Yet I have never been denied access by, as this book bears testimony to.
[Guest]: I remember one of the best compliments I think I was ever given was the one of the members
[Guest]: of the Politburo, wonderful word you coined for the clique.
[Guest]: So in West Indies, when World Cup 2007, when I write in the book that I call up Dravid
[Guest]: to wish him best of luck against the Sri Lanka match, because I had almost envisaged that
[Guest]: we are going to lose because the team was in a disarray.
[Guest]: This member of the Politburo meets me and he says that the only journalist in India
[Guest]: today whom both Dravid and Ganguly talked to, I thought it was, it's a great compliment.
[Guest]: Because there were camps and there were some journalists in one camp, some journalists
[Guest]: in other camp.
[Guest]: And if I could manage to create this, even this impression among the reporters, especially
[Guest]: among the Politburo member, that's not only Sourav who interacts with him, even Dravid
[Guest]: interacts with him.
[Amit Varma]: That is a fabulous compliment.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that whole Nagpur incident, you know, you've narrated it so well from both
[Amit Varma]: points of view, which, which I, because you're speaking to both the players.
[Amit Varma]: So you're getting the inside view from both, you know, what Ganguly thinks about it and
[Amit Varma]: what Dravid is saying is happening.
[Amit Varma]: I thought it was great to sort of, I mean, I was an active journalist at the time I was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, covering, you know, I was in journalism.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of knew a lot of what had happened, but you've given this inside view from both
[Amit Varma]: the Ganguly and the Dravid point of view from both the horse's mouth, as it were, which
[Amit Varma]: I liked.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another bit where you talk about how, despite criticism, they still remain
[Amit Varma]: friends where you write, and I'll quote this paragraph you write about Mr. Bedi, where
[Amit Varma]: you say, quote, I remember doing a critical story on him in which I wrote that Bedi needed
[Amit Varma]: to be present in Punjab to see its cricket structure firsthand, if he was to understand
[Amit Varma]: what was needed for improvements.
[Amit Varma]: This is when he was Punjab cricket coach, by the way, I also hinted that some wrong selections
[Amit Varma]: were being made because Bedi was misled by Punjab officials.
[Amit Varma]: The morning my story appeared, Bedi barged into my room, turned his backside towards
[Amit Varma]: me, bent over, and in a tone more sarcastic than bitter, said in the crudest of Punjabi,
[Amit Varma]: Mar lo, jinne maane hain mar lo, and then you translate that stop code, which I found
[Amit Varma]: so charming.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, he's still your friend to this day and all that you have that sort of affection
[Amit Varma]: and that's really you and that only you're right just comes with doing your work so well
[Amit Varma]: that they sort of respect you for that alone.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is about how just what a cricket writer is doing or what they are supposed
[Amit Varma]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: The brief of that itself has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And it changed in a very big way with the television era, because before the television
[Amit Varma]: era happens, you're writing a match report where you have to describe events, what happened
[Amit Varma]: today, you know, that is what the reader wants to know, because the reader has no idea.
[Amit Varma]: And that's your job.
[Amit Varma]: It's a that is a narrative, it's it's sequential, and it's like these other things that happened
[Amit Varma]: in the day split.
[Amit Varma]: Once television comes on, and a significant chunk, at least for international matches,
[Amit Varma]: a significant chunk of your audience knows what happened.
[Amit Varma]: They have the narrative, and especially more acute today, when they know what happened
[Amit Varma]: in real time on the internet, the brief of the writer obviously changes.
[Amit Varma]: So now you no longer have to do a linear description of what happened.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you pick some other narrative within the day.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe there is some engrossing battle with a spinner bowling five maidens to a particularly
[Amit Varma]: patient batsman.
[Amit Varma]: And that can become your dramatic arc for the day, or you find other dramatic arcs,
[Amit Varma]: you know, within within the day, like, you know, to take a dramatic arc from a match
[Amit Varma]: in an earlier generation in your book, you write about how in 1974, when the Indian cricket
[Amit Varma]: team played there, you know, an entire day would go by when Wadikar is not even talking
[Amit Varma]: to his spinners, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because of how relations are, and that's a dramatic narrative arc.
[Amit Varma]: And what I and I, of course, sort of joint cricket journalism at a point where it's very
[Amit Varma]: much shifted already, where, you know, we would do what we would call a bulletin, which
[Amit Varma]: is the linear report, but we'd have other things around it.
[Amit Varma]: And even within the linear report, it's just you don't just have to do event, event, event,
[Amit Varma]: you can look at larger things.
[Amit Varma]: And I would think that this not only changes the reports themselves, which is trivial,
[Amit Varma]: of course, it does, but it also changes the way that cricket writers now watch cricket,
[Amit Varma]: where they are not watching, because they have to cover the events which happen and
[Amit Varma]: write them down.
[Amit Varma]: But they're watching at a different meta level where they're looking for these stories where
[Amit Varma]: they're looking for these other angles.
[Amit Varma]: Now, given that you really straddle these eras, you know, you straddle the pre television
[Amit Varma]: era, and then you will post television era and you were an editor yourself guiding so
[Amit Varma]: many writers, do you think that that changes the way you watch cricket to begin with, that
[Amit Varma]: your imperatives change?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so give me a sense of what this evolution has been.
[Amit Varma]: Because I actually, you know, left cricket journalism in 2008, 2009.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure it's evolved a lot even since then, because now there is just so much material
[Amit Varma]: on the internet, everything is real time, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of the evolution of cricket writing.
[Guest]: Well, I also left active reporting in 2007, that was my last event I covered was that
[Guest]: World Cup.
[Guest]: Apart from I went to see Ganguly's retirement match, because I thought he had promised also
[Guest]: an interview and also I thought I'd watched his debut.
[Guest]: So let me.
[Guest]: Yeah, it has changed and it's changed dramatically.
[Guest]: When I started match report was the only authentic document of what had happened of the day.
[Guest]: So there was no recording of the event, either the match report or people who would have
[Guest]: watched themselves live with television coming in, when people watching, so suddenly everyone
[Guest]: would say that, look, why are you writing a match report?
[Guest]: Why you and especially those statistically oriented, boring match reports, where, what
[Guest]: ball a four was hit, when was the maiden bold.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: You are not used to the new era has dawned in.
[Guest]: People are watching you, you become almost redundant in a way.
[Guest]: Now do you change your style?
[Guest]: You have to change your style.
[Guest]: Then you capture, as you say, these moments and build a narrative.
[Guest]: And every report has to be readable in the first place.
[Guest]: See what no matter what you write, the reader has to get engaged in it.
[Guest]: I mean, why is the reader coming to your report is because he's interested in that game.
[Guest]: He's coming to that.
[Guest]: My thing to my reporters at that time was that, look, don't forget the fact that a match
[Guest]: has there has been an event on the day.
[Guest]: There are a lot of writers who forget the fact that they're writing about that day's
[Guest]: play and they pick up one thing and write from beautifully written.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that it's not beautifully written, but when you read from first line to end,
[Guest]: you wonder what is it about?
[Guest]: Oh, okay.
[Guest]: I enjoyed reading it.
[Guest]: So I would tell them that, look, develop the skill of weaving this moment with introduce
[Guest]: the match also.
[Guest]: I mean, this narrative shouldn't forget the fact that so-and-so has happened, a match
[Guest]: is placed in the context, whether you need runs to win or the wicket is bad.
[Guest]: So you bet it badly.
[Guest]: So there is a past and a future likelihood, which don't forget that.
[Guest]: But there are such wonderful writers these days.
[Guest]: And I know one looks forward to even reading their that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I see a lot of young readers complaining that they read about it.
[Guest]: But what is it about?
[Guest]: So it's a difficult situation for a journalist.
[Guest]: I think still British journalists still, I think, stick to the whole formula, do they?
[Guest]: I think they do.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't been reading recent cricket journalism, to be honest, I read a lot of football, but
[Amit Varma]: I haven't, you know, so I go to the Guardian every day.
[Amit Varma]: So what does the football reporter do internationally?
[Amit Varma]: It sticks to?
[Amit Varma]: No, I think the football reporter won't do a blow-by-blow analysis, they'll do a lot
[Amit Varma]: of stuff around it.
[Amit Varma]: And generally for every match, and this was a formula we used to follow, there'll be one
[Amit Varma]: report, which is kind of a report, but not exactly linear, which can flow around, but
[Amit Varma]: which is kind of a report.
[Amit Varma]: And then there'll be other pieces on the match, which, you know, we look at other angles,
[Guest]: colour pieces, comment pieces.
[Guest]: It has an advantage that there is a scorecard, and if it is a detailed scorecard, you can
[Guest]: get the sense of what has happened on the pitch.
[Guest]: Then you can, around it, weave different stories.
[Guest]: So that's why I think the present-day journalist has a much more difficult job to do, and his
[Guest]: writing skills have to be really, really good to engage his readers, his or her readers.
[Guest]: And that's why he needs to be at the top of his subject as well as his craft.
[Guest]: See, unless you are at the top of your subject, you understand your subject, you can't weave
[Guest]: other stories also.
[Guest]: Because it's through the understanding of your subject, you pick up those moments which
[Guest]: you think are important and need to be described at length.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud again, what we earlier discussed about cricketers, that the ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: is so much better, pedagogy and learning cricket is so much easier, and therefore, you have
[Amit Varma]: much more depth in cricketers.
[Amit Varma]: Would you say the same is true of cricket writers?
[Guest]: Well, their writing skills are definitely better.
[Guest]: I mean, I can see that.
[Guest]: Everyone can see that.
[Guest]: Yes, they're, see, it's easier, they're better trained, far better trained than I ever was.
[Guest]: By editors like yourself?
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe through experience, but they're better trained even in their colleges.
[Guest]: You have colleges which train you in journalism, there are colleges which train you now in
[Guest]: sports journalism, there are colleges which train you in your writing skills.
[Guest]: You yourself do this.
[Guest]: You train people in writing better, not just sports, but any subject, basic concept of
[Guest]: what good writing is.
[Guest]: So there are people who are trained in that, and they are better.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I would say that the earlier generation good writers would have
[Guest]: been equally good today, if they were there, and there have been still wonderful writers
[Guest]: of that the earlier era.
[Guest]: It's not as if, as if they were bad writers, they were good writers.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I mean, the most memorable cricket writing that I read is really written by people
[Amit Varma]: in that generation.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a selection bias, I'm just kind of, I don't read as much of a volume of cricket
[Amit Varma]: writing today as I perhaps should.
[Amit Varma]: My next question refers to something we discussed, but from a different angle, like we spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how there is a danger that in journalism, writers can become jaded, and they can go
[Amit Varma]: through the motions and they're ticking boxes and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that is just at the level of, you know, the everyday sort of routines of the job and
[Amit Varma]: how you handle it.
[Amit Varma]: But there is something broader there that, you know, I want to ask you about, which is
[Amit Varma]: that when we talk of journalism, at one level, it is a profession, that is all it is people
[Amit Varma]: want to read what happened.
[Amit Varma]: A journalist is someone who will collect the facts, write a readable report, put it out
[Amit Varma]: there, there's a functional element to it.
[Amit Varma]: The journalistic outfit is therefore a business, there is supply and demand, you're fulfilling
[Amit Varma]: the demand with your supply, and the profit and loss statement matters.
[Amit Varma]: And beyond that, values don't really matter, it just matters that you fulfill the demand.
[Amit Varma]: And there is another view of journalism, which is a romantic view, which will be that no,
[Amit Varma]: there are certain values which are core to good journalism, you know, that of like, the
[Amit Varma]: whole notion of say, afflicting the comfortable and comforting the afflicted, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is such a cliche also.
[Amit Varma]: But that whole notion of doing the first draft of history, as well as you can, with all the
[Amit Varma]: integrity you can, and so on and so forth, you know, there are certain values that you
[Amit Varma]: bring to the game.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you that objectivity is impossible per se, because everybody is who they are,
[Amit Varma]: they're coming from a particular place.
[Amit Varma]: But within that you make the best good faith effort, you know, to do justice to the facts
[Amit Varma]: as you see them.
[Amit Varma]: And there is today a conflict, I think, I mean, there's always been a conflict, but
[Amit Varma]: today, it seems stark, a conflict between these two visions of journalism, where on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, somebody who owns a journalistic outfit will say profit and loss, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if for example, the government of the day doesn't like what I'm doing, and they do,
[Amit Varma]: you know, carry out an income tax rate on the other business that I run.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to toe the line and I don't care about your final values, you go to hell.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, people believe and in a way, I believe that there is something
[Amit Varma]: there are higher values that you have to kind of fight for, and that matters.
[Amit Varma]: And this again relates to the whole jadedness thing, that, you know, you can get jaded in
[Amit Varma]: terms of the sort of routines you follow and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, some people can get jaded, and some people can always just try to look at
[Amit Varma]: what they're writing about in a fresh way.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, some people can treat it just as a business, it's functional, but some people
[Amit Varma]: can always keep those higher principles in mind.
[Amit Varma]: So what what's your view on all of this?
[Guest]: See, ideally, obviously, who would not want to say that the higher principles are more
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: I mean, those higher principles are not that you, you are like doing something which you're
[Guest]: not meant to do.
[Guest]: You are meant to, say, for instance, you take a match, you are meant to report the match
[Guest]: as faithfully possible to your readers what has happened.
[Guest]: Your role is very secondary, actually, you are a medium, you're not doing the actual
[Guest]: job, you are not the main player in that, you are just conveying.
[Guest]: Now how do you convey that?
[Guest]: You can only convey that as I was saying earlier, also, you understand that, see, one of the
[Guest]: principles of reporting a match at that level is that you are so good at understanding technically,
[Guest]: the skills of the game that you can report it faithfully.
[Guest]: Now that itself is an ethical principle.
[Guest]: I mean, now this ethical principle doesn't require any great sacrifice, it requires sacrifice
[Guest]: in the sense that you have to train yourself for that, how good are you for that.
[Guest]: You have to be, I mean, as a journalist, your job is, what is a journalist's job?
[Guest]: To report faithfully whatever he sees, that itself requires to see the truth or to see
[Guest]: something as close to truth as it is possible within your capacity.
[Guest]: So these are higher principles, I don't think these are higher principles which require
[Guest]: you to go on a fast or become an activist, no.
[Guest]: Now you're talking about ideologically inclined journalism.
[Amit Varma]: I think what I do is go outside the context of cricket, you know, and just talk about
[Amit Varma]: what is happening in the space of political journalism or just in a matter of reporting
[Amit Varma]: what is happening in the country, because too much of our journalism, quote unquote
[Amit Varma]: journalism today seems to be about narrative battles, and not really about what happened.
[Amit Varma]: And I think just to reframe my question, I think I was imprecise when I sort of expressed
[Amit Varma]: myself.
[Amit Varma]: But to reframe it, my question would be that, in that broader context of writing the first
[Amit Varma]: draft of history, is it possible or sustainable for those higher value journalism to be done?
[Amit Varma]: Because when the environment is the way it is, you know, then it almost seems practical,
[Amit Varma]: that if I am running a journalistic outfit, I'll be like, I want to keep running my outfit,
[Amit Varma]: not get into trouble with the government, because you can shut me down.
[Amit Varma]: I want to keep making profits and give people what they want.
[Amit Varma]: If they want Annab Goswami, I will give them Annab Goswami and 40 shouting people on a
[Amit Varma]: screen.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a certain cold monetary logic to that as well.
[Amit Varma]: So is it and you see smaller people who have less to lose, and because they have less to
[Amit Varma]: lose, they can fight.
[Amit Varma]: So you see smaller people like the news minute or a scroll or alt news, and so on and all
[Amit Varma]: fighting this, you know, and even those guys, if the government really cares about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, starts caring about English media, they can stomp them down as well.
[Amit Varma]: So my question really is that, you know, is there a space is it sustainable for values
[Amit Varma]: based journalism of the kind that we're talking about to survive in cricket, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: not much at stake.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everybody wants to describe the facts.
[Guest]: No, even even in sports journalism, cricket journalism, it's becoming difficult because
[Guest]: there are sponsors who advertise in the newspapers and they pay them huge money for advertising.
[Guest]: And you can't like if you want to be critical of something wrong has happened, you are prevented
[Guest]: from doing that because the paper's profitability suffers.
[Guest]: So it's a difficult situation.
[Guest]: It's extremely difficult to be an honest journalist, even if you are ideologically inclined towards
[Guest]: the same government, which is controlling power.
[Guest]: Because if you're an honest journalist, even there, you may be logically inclined towards
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: But at the same time, if there are wrong things happening, there are corruption happening,
[Guest]: if you are treating people badly, if the policy has gone wrong, you will be critical, even
[Guest]: if you are if you are left liberally inclined, like what happened during Congress's regime.
[Guest]: Maybe they were not as controlling of media there, even their own people who are inclined
[Guest]: towards their larger policies were critical of them or harshly critical of them.
[Guest]: But today's time, I mean, it's a very, I don't want to become, I don't want to pontificate
[Guest]: because it's a difficult situation.
[Guest]: People have to make a living out of it.
[Guest]: It's after all the career, it's not that they are activists and they're making a living
[Guest]: from something else.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: And the question is that with such kind of a draconian control, what does a journalist
[Guest]: do?
[Guest]: I mean, it will be very difficult for me to be in their shoes and say that, no, no, no,
[Guest]: I will like, I will still be critical, I will write what the truth is, even if I lose my
[Guest]: job.
[Guest]: It's easier said than done.
[Guest]: Somehow, some balance has to be needed and we are at a very critical point in our society,
[Guest]: in our state.
[Guest]: And where do we go from here?
[Guest]: These are questions which I think I am incapable of actually, I wholeheartedly agree with you
[Guest]: that these principles are, I mean, more important.
[Guest]: And I'm sure there are still people who are adhering to those principles at a great cost
[Guest]: to themselves.
[Guest]: And that's why you need to admire, respect and marvel at their strength to fight.
[Amit Varma]: There's sort of another question, and this, you know, comes from a number of points in
[Amit Varma]: your book.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this incident you narrate in your book, which you recall as a chilling
[Amit Varma]: incident that you haven't been able to forget.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll sort of read these paras out because it chilled me as well when I read it.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, seemed not, you know, like, why should it be unfamiliar to any of
[Amit Varma]: us given the way the system works?
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about, you know, you're talking about a particular point in time, and you
[Amit Varma]: write about the Patiala District Cricket Association, and you say, quote, the Patiala District Cricket
[Amit Varma]: Association was taking good care of us.
[Amit Varma]: One of the dinners thrown by them ran late, some of us got a bit too drunk.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the public relations officers, PRO of the Punjab government was given the responsibility
[Amit Varma]: of seeing us to a hotel safely.
[Amit Varma]: He was a burly man with a big turban.
[Amit Varma]: I was asked to sit in a jeep in a parking lot.
[Amit Varma]: I probably dozed off in the front seat.
[Amit Varma]: And when I woke up, I realized there were two people at the back.
[Amit Varma]: I gathered that one was a public relations man.
[Amit Varma]: And the other was a professional photographer who was assigned to cover these kind of events
[Amit Varma]: for a fee.
[Amit Varma]: What startled me was a desperate tone in which he was pleading with the PRO not to stop giving
[Amit Varma]: him work as it would affect his earnings.
[Amit Varma]: The PRO was stern and rude, saying how can you refuse our demand fulfilled at first and
[Amit Varma]: your assignments won't stop.
[Amit Varma]: The photographer continued pleading.
[Amit Varma]: Please understand she is my daughter.
[Amit Varma]: How can you ask me to do this?
[Amit Varma]: Ask for anyone else.
[Amit Varma]: I will do it.
[Amit Varma]: But not this.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: He was begging.
[Amit Varma]: His voice choked.
[Amit Varma]: The burly Sikh wouldn't budge.
[Amit Varma]: Like the debauched Maharajas of old, he said, no one can refuse us.
[Amit Varma]: Fulfill the wish and it will be business as usual, otherwise dot dot dot.
[Amit Varma]: By then I was wide awake.
[Amit Varma]: And these are your words.
[Amit Varma]: Was this for real?
[Amit Varma]: Was this conversation really taking place?
[Amit Varma]: A wave of emotions, fear, disbelief, disgust, and even a feeling of humiliation overwhelmed
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: And this conversation haunts me even today, that PRO went on to become a very influential
[Amit Varma]: man in Punjab's political setup.
[Amit Varma]: You know, later in a different part of the book, you speak about, you know, the corruption
[Amit Varma]: within the cricketing ecosystem itself, which we know about.
[Amit Varma]: And one example you give us of the great bowler, Rajinder Goel, when he was a junior selector,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he insisted on picking one boy in the, you know, the junior team.
[Amit Varma]: And people kept asking him, why him?
[Amit Varma]: He's done nothing.
[Amit Varma]: And then he said that, no, no, he revealed that this kid is the son of the postman.
[Amit Varma]: And the last time I didn't select him, all my letters kept getting misplaced.
[Amit Varma]: So I just don't want my letters to get misplaced.
[Amit Varma]: I can't think of any other way, you know, which tells you about the different ways in
[Amit Varma]: which people have power over your lives.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, it's a humble postman, but obviously, you know, the rich and the powerful
[Amit Varma]: pull their strings and just, you know, corrupt the system in this way.
[Amit Varma]: And in another part, you have this sort of passage, where you write about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Mandal years, where, you know, you write, I worked for the Indian Express in Chandigarh
[Amit Varma]: for 15 years, and later years of this period would be spent drinking in the press club
[Amit Varma]: in sector 27 and having loud boisterous arguments with friends, while indulging in inane gossip
[Amit Varma]: or debates on cricket.
[Amit Varma]: Around us was emerging the specter of Punjab terrorism and strained Sikh Hindu relationships.
[Amit Varma]: The Mandal commission that exposed the hierarchical fault lines in Hindu society and the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: right wing symbolized by the Ram temple movement and the demolition of the Babri Masjid.
[Amit Varma]: What amazes me today when I recall that period is how we managed to focus on the game despite
[Amit Varma]: the killings, the fear and the sectarian and caste divides that were devastating life,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And so the larger question I'm coming at through all of this is that in all these years that
[Amit Varma]: you were a cricket journalist, you were obviously deeply affected by all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: The rot within our society, the rot within the cricket ecosystem itself, and then all
[Amit Varma]: these fissures and divisions which are sort of exploding.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the almost rhetorical question that you pose in at the end of the Pariah
[Amit Varma]: readout is, is what I'd ask you that did you then feel tempted ki nahi yaar abhi cricket
[Amit Varma]: bahut ho gaya hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I want to write about these other things.
[Amit Varma]: I want to be part of, you know, covering all of this other stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So how was it psychologically?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were you able to compartmentalize and say ki theek hai, this one part of me, which
[Amit Varma]: is the concerned citizen, and then I'm doing a job, which is a cricket journalist, I'll
[Amit Varma]: continue doing that.
[Amit Varma]: Or were you ever tempted ki theek hai, you know, let me, let me write about other things
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Well, yes, I was tempted.
[Guest]: I had a lot of friends of mine who used to tell me that, look, you since you're interested
[Guest]: and involved with so many things, why don't you write about them?
[Guest]: Maybe I felt I was tempted, but at the same time, this comfort of doing a job and a fixed
[Guest]: salary and now to disturb that whole ecosystem would be difficult.
[Guest]: Maybe that prevented me from taking this leap.
[Guest]: I think that's one of the important reasons why if you see in my career, it's not as if
[Guest]: I lacked understanding of the game, it's not as if I didn't have access to cricketers,
[Guest]: I got more and more involved with writing on the corruption of the game.
[Guest]: I think that was my way of getting out of this everyday match report when so much around
[Guest]: was happening.
[Guest]: And that's why I think it took me to the match fixing story, took me to take a lot of strong
[Guest]: articles or exposes on cricket corruption.
[Guest]: I think that's one reason why I'm known more, people know me as somebody who, he was someone
[Guest]: who was written on the match fixing.
[Guest]: There are many times I want to tell people that, look, I understand the game as well
[Guest]: as a lot of journalists would, a lot of good journalists do, because it's not as if my
[Guest]: lack of my understanding of the game made me become more and more like a political journalist
[Guest]: who sees cricket in that prism and writes about its officials.
[Guest]: But I think that's the short point I want to make is that's one main reason that why
[Guest]: I shifted from purely as a match reporter to writing about cricket related issues of
[Amit Varma]: corruption.
[Amit Varma]: And did that ever get you into trouble?
[Amit Varma]: Was that a more risky path for you to take?
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously, when you start writing about all of these issues, you know, the board
[Amit Varma]: can get pissed off, local authorities can get pissed off.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of a, it's a riskier route to take.
[Guest]: Well, I think I was again, you see, I was without a job for a year in Pioneer.
[Guest]: When I went to 96, 97, I did that fixing report from West Indies, but I didn't lose my job
[Guest]: because of that.
[Guest]: We walked out because of certain issues with the paper and its ownership, which are in
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: I was in with Indian Express.
[Guest]: Before that, I had come from Chandigarh with the promise that I will become its sports
[Guest]: editor or the reason in charge, it never happened.
[Guest]: I could hardly get to write, but I don't think they were connected with, I would believe
[Guest]: that they were not connected with what I was writing.
[Guest]: My later part of my writings, in a way, made me a pariah with the cricket administration.
[Guest]: I had a lot of issues with them and they would, but I was lucky enough to say, become the
[Guest]: sports editor of a big newspaper.
[Guest]: So because of that, I could overcome those shortcomings, in the sense the shortcomings
[Guest]: that your access, you no longer have that access.
[Guest]: So I was lucky.
[Guest]: I would say that it happened in the later part of my career.
[Guest]: Maybe I was already, already I had established myself in the profession and people who would,
[Guest]: if it had been done by a younger reporter, maybe he would have suffered more.
[Guest]: In my case, maybe they found it more difficult to deal with me because I was already established
[Guest]: and that could be the reason why I didn't suffer as much as a lot of people do when
[Amit Varma]: they write like that.
[Amit Varma]: When I was, you know, a cricket journalist at Wisden, I remember calling one of our cricketing
[Amit Varma]: legends from the 60s and 70s for a quote on something or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And when he learned I was from Wisden, he said, what about vitamin M?
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, what is vitamin M?
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized that, you know, he wants to get paid for a quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a very poignant moment.
[Amit Varma]: I honestly, I felt like crying because this is, you know, one of the heroes you idolize
[Amit Varma]: and you totally understand where they're coming from because in their generation, they really
[Amit Varma]: took up the game for the love of it.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, jobs and other things happen, but basically there's not much money.
[Amit Varma]: They're not getting rich, there aren't endorsements, all of this stuff isn't happening.
[Amit Varma]: And they've lost out on all that.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, during your career, you saw the transition of the game from a point where
[Amit Varma]: you're going from a sort of an amateur ethic kind of thing where people aren't really making
[Amit Varma]: that much money, where if you play at the Ranji level, you do it because you know, State
[Amit Varma]: Bank of India will give you a job or services will give you a job or whatever, to a stage
[Amit Varma]: where cricketers became phenomenally rich as they are today.
[Amit Varma]: And the IPL, in fact, God bless it spread that wealth around among cricketers even more.
[Amit Varma]: So you had a broader pool of people who are making a lot of money.
[Amit Varma]: But in that transition came those years of match fixing, which are also poignant for
[Amit Varma]: different reasons, and which you covered so closely.
[Amit Varma]: And what I am always struck by is the human aspect of that, that why do players who are
[Amit Varma]: superstars who are so already idealized by their countries to the extent that people
[Amit Varma]: would even make temples for them?
[Amit Varma]: Why are they so tempted that they risk it all for something like this?
[Amit Varma]: And that human story has really been sort of fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: And match fixing was part of it for a long time, like you narrate an incident from I
[Amit Varma]: think 1979, where Gundappa Vishwanath was the captain of a game against Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that Asif Iqbal came to him and said that, listen, we'll toss and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But no matter how the coin lands, we'll both say that India won the toss, right?
[Amit Varma]: And Vishwanath doesn't know how to react to that, like, what is this?
[Amit Varma]: What is even happening?
[Amit Varma]: So from back then, this was in the air.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you realized that this stuff was going on?
[Amit Varma]: When did you begin to realize that this was serious?
[Amit Varma]: What were your feelings as a fan of cricket and a cricket writer and someone who knew
[Amit Varma]: so many of these cricketers personally about what was happening?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you then, you know, do all that you did, all the journalism that you did leading
[Amit Varma]: up to writing the book and, you know, all of that, how did it all pan out?
[Guest]: See I think because of my varied interest in what was happening in the society, I kind
[Guest]: of branched out in a way and I started looking at things differently, looking at the administration
[Guest]: of cricket differently.
[Guest]: So in that, once I realized that the fraternity, the cricketing fraternity itself was talking
[Guest]: about fixing, be it the players you knew or be it the officials you knew, today when I
[Guest]: look back, I find it very deeply, I mean, it's a failure of the journalism at that point
[Guest]: of time that there were not many people, we all journalists had heard about it, knew about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I know it's difficult.
[Guest]: How do you write about it?
[Guest]: I mean, it's such a, unless you have proof, you can't make such an allegation that, look,
[Guest]: this cricket whole ecosystem is plagued with this malice.
[Guest]: But at least people were being made aware that this possibility is there and a time
[Guest]: had reached by 96-97 that if you were part of that fraternity, it was talked as if you
[Guest]: watch a match and they'll say, oh, yeh khaya hoga pesa.
[Guest]: I mean, these are people who are involved with the game.
[Guest]: These are not spectators talking.
[Guest]: So once I was aware of it, I was looking for an opportunity to, how do you write about
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: And that was provided in 97 in West Indies where this bookie was there and a relationship
[Guest]: is formed and I realized that, then I talked to Tendulkar before doing the story.
[Guest]: So I do a story, it's a story which is suggesting, telling the readers that this possibility
[Guest]: is very much there.
[Guest]: It's not a story which is saying that so-and-so has taken money and, because at that time
[Guest]: there were a lot of other stories floating around, like Shane Warne had said that Salim
[Guest]: Ali had offered him money.
[Guest]: So I did my own story.
[Guest]: The only thing the difference was, it was in an Indian context and we telling readers
[Guest]: that it's a possibility which is very much there.
[Guest]: I wouldn't have done that story if I was not privy to what was happening or what was being
[Guest]: talked about.
[Guest]: Otherwise, to a lay leader, it might have looked like many people said that this is
[Guest]: what sensationalizing something very trivial that there is a book.
[Guest]: So what?
[Guest]: There's so many people.
[Guest]: But I had taken a conscious decision to do that story because I knew that there is truth
[Amit Varma]: behind it.
[Amit Varma]: And the story just to summarize for the listeners is that a bookie had approached you and offered
[Amit Varma]: you money.
[Guest]: Offered me money to introduce him to top Indian cricketers to manipulate matches.
[Guest]: And the bookie also had said that he has been stopped from visiting South Africa because
[Guest]: he has gone there so often because South African cricketers are the maximum involved in match
[Guest]: fixing.
[Guest]: I mean, this is this thing written in the book, which was published in 99 and the Hensi
[Guest]: Krone episode broke about a year later.
[Guest]: So that fellow may have been fibbing, but but circumstantial silly if he's saying that
[Guest]: and it turns out to be true.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that I did that story and that story because I was not me.
[Guest]: Every journalist knew that it is happening.
[Guest]: So at least your obligation to your readers is to tell them that, look, this is there.
[Guest]: It's not let's not talk among ourselves alone.
[Guest]: Let the readers also know that this thing is there.
[Guest]: Then Outlook and Anirudh Bahl and they did a fantastic job.
[Guest]: They went deeper into it.
[Guest]: They provided proof of it.
[Guest]: But my relationship with the Indian board strained so much that they would not talk
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: In fact, Justice Chandrachud, who was a retired Supreme Court Chief Justice, when that one
[Guest]: man committee was formed by the board, his point of reference was my story also.
[Guest]: Among the reference points was that people say this, this pioneer story but done by this
[Guest]: says this.
[Guest]: And he calls journalists to appear before him.
[Guest]: He doesn't call me, which is strange.
[Guest]: I mean, he refers to my story but doesn't call me.
[Guest]: So the rot is in that level.
[Guest]: So I kept on writing.
[Guest]: I forced my way into Chandrachud committee because I told the Bombay, I was a pioneer
[Guest]: sports editor, to ask Chandrachud that when your reference is that my pioneer story that
[Guest]: why aren't you calling that man, you're calling other journalists, you're not calling the
[Guest]: man to ask him that, why did you do that story?
[Guest]: Give me facts, give me truth.
[Guest]: So that's how I got into it and it created a lot of, I mean, I was without a job for
[Guest]: a year or more.
[Guest]: Shekhar comes to my rescue again in the book, I've written that and I think because of those
[Guest]: writings also, I would have found it difficult to get back into journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And you were absolutely vindicated, obviously, as we know today, you know, if you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you don't have the timeline of the book that is published in 99, you think, yeh to
[Amit Varma]: pata hai, yeh to sab ho gaya hai, but actually the revelations really broke after that.
[Guest]: And the story I did was in 97 West Indies tour and the journalists started making fun
[Guest]: of me.
[Guest]: Yeah, they started making fun of me that yeh kya hai, hawa baazi mein story, yeh wo.
[Guest]: I mean, I was literally, I mean, A, probably many journalists may have felt threatened
[Guest]: that a lot of editors were asking them that if this story has appeared, why don't you
[Guest]: follow up?
[Guest]: Is there some truth in it?
[Guest]: So maybe one, they came from this embarrassment that saying that, oh, we didn't do it.
[Guest]: So their reaction was, it's all rubbish, it's all.
[Guest]: So they, everyone was aware of, there was one important journalist who would in the
[Guest]: press box be all the time with the bookies, telling them what odds are there and what
[Guest]: the weather is like.
[Guest]: I mean, this, all of us were aware of it.
[Guest]: It's our failure that we didn't get it more about that those days into the print.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and again, sort of the nature of how circumstances can completely change something,
[Amit Varma]: you know, comes about when you write about how, you know, when Tendulkar got the captaincy
[Amit Varma]: for the second time in 99, one of his sort of conditions for taking the captaincy was
[Amit Varma]: that Azhar should not be part of the team.
[Amit Varma]: And apparently, the players were ready to revolt if Azhar was brought back.
[Amit Varma]: And when it seemed like Azhar was going to be brought back, Tendulkar gave up the captaincy.
[Amit Varma]: And at that time, there was a shadow over Kapil.
[Amit Varma]: So Kapil was moved as coach.
[Amit Varma]: And then right after that happened, Kronia came out and he confessed and he said that
[Amit Varma]: Azhar is the man who introduced me to the bookies.
[Amit Varma]: So Azhar was out anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out in the book, the counterfactual is that if Kronia had said what he said six
[Amit Varma]: months earlier, Tendulkar would probably have remained captain, Kapil may not have had to
[Amit Varma]: go and the Ganguly era may never have happened.
[Guest]: Well, that's an assumption I made, may make on circumstantial evidence.
[Guest]: I mean, Tendulkar has to himself corroborate that if it corroborate that, yes, it is because
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: My assumption and I feel I may not be wrong in it.
[Guest]: This is what I had seen.
[Guest]: I'd done the story from Australia in the 1999 tour of India's to South Africa when Tendulkar
[Guest]: was captain.
[Guest]: I'd confirmed the story from a player that yes, the entire Indian team was willing to
[Guest]: write to the board not to select Tendulkar.
[Guest]: I knew for a fact that Tendulkar was suspicious of Azhar.
[Guest]: So and earlier also his regaining captaincy also had to do with Tendulkar, Azhar was dropped
[Guest]: from the team.
[Guest]: So my assumption is that had Hansi Kronia thing broken earlier, Tendulkar had stayed
[Guest]: as our captain.
[Guest]: And yes, Ganguly era would have never been there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, again, a fascinating sort of counterfactual.
[Amit Varma]: And what was the sense you got from the players about all of this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, a lot of people subsequently, for example, have criticized Tendulkar that
[Amit Varma]: if he knew about it, he should have spoken out.
[Amit Varma]: And the counterpoint to that is that, you know, that he must have thought that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, why take a risk?
[Amit Varma]: Why get into a mess?
[Amit Varma]: You know, the underworld is also involved, for example, just close your mouth and don't
[Amit Varma]: talk about it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So one, what is your view on that particular question that should the players who knew
[Amit Varma]: about it have spoken out, or were they just being practical?
[Amit Varma]: And the other question is that, what did the players of the time themselves feel about
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was it really just a question of a handful of bad apples?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there a deeper rot within the system?
[Guest]: Look, my sense, again, I can't prove it, it's like, a lot of things can be defamatory also,
[Guest]: but whatever little bit interaction with the players of earlier era, I'm not talking about
[Guest]: the Ganguly era players, but the players of just preceding them, the Azhar era players
[Guest]: and was even then that this practice was as far more widespread than we would like to
[Guest]: believe, not just with Indian cricketers, but with cricketers internationally.
[Guest]: Since if that is true, since it was so widespread, so all of them, if most of them are complicit
[Guest]: in it, they would, they're part of it, they would just not want to take a stand or talk
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: Once we go into the Ganguly-Tendulkar era, Tendulkar is probably the link, I mean, he's
[Guest]: the senior most among them, whether how much he was aware of it, because when I interviewed
[Guest]: him in West Indies in 97, before doing the story, which I've recorded in both the books
[Guest]: in that also in this also in the earlier book, not quite cricket, is that he tells me that
[Guest]: he's heard these stories of players being involved, but don't do the story, but give
[Guest]: this number to the cops to record the conversation so that we will at least come to know the
[Guest]: truth, which was a very valid suggestion.
[Guest]: Maybe I was too much in a hurry to finish off the story there and not go into that.
[Guest]: Maybe I should have.
[Guest]: So it's obvious that Tendulkar was aware of the fact that there is this possibility, there
[Guest]: may be, he had heard stories.
[Guest]: How much of those stories he had proof of, I have no idea.
[Guest]: Did he speak to authorities, did he speak to the establishment?
[Guest]: He may have.
[Guest]: I mean, the problem with our documentation is that we don't have like whistleblower establishment.
[Guest]: We don't have players who have the courage to speak.
[Guest]: Even today, Tendulkar on record has given many interviews in which he has said that
[Guest]: he has never ever heard that match fixing was taking place.
[Amit Varma]: Why was he so vehemently against Azhar being in the team then?
[Amit Varma]: Like it almost feels from the narrative of the book that I was almost a condition for
[Guest]: him taking up the captaincy again.
[Guest]: Yeah, because all these players were, that's what I'm saying, they were aware of the fact
[Guest]: that Azhar could be one of the kingpins of what was happening.
[Guest]: And it was their way of conveying to the board that look, don't select him.
[Guest]: I mean, when they got together to say that like, if he is selected, we will withdraw
[Guest]: from the team in Australia, that obviously meant that they were conveying their feelings
[Guest]: to the board.
[Guest]: But what board did was not listen to them, get back Azhar, his Azhar's misfortune that
[Guest]: he got injured, he missed his playing 100 test match.
[Guest]: And then subsequently, the whole thing exploded and we came to know what the truth is.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense would be that this happened to happen in those years just before big money
[Amit Varma]: became really commonplace in the game.
[Amit Varma]: So when I look at the game today, for example, the way the incentives are aligned, I would
[Amit Varma]: just assume that there is absolutely no top player who would even contemplate something
[Amit Varma]: like this, because you're already earning so much money through legitimate means that
[Amit Varma]: they would never risk their career or anything.
[Amit Varma]: So if anybody is tempted by match fixing or spot fixing rather, then there'll be people
[Amit Varma]: on the absolute fringes, who are, you know, who are sort of, you know, IPL squad, but
[Amit Varma]: maybe not a regular member or whatever people on the fringes who are not making that kind
[Amit Varma]: of insane money.
[Amit Varma]: But I cannot possibly imagine any international player even contemplating it because now there
[Amit Varma]: is too much to lose.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you'd agree with?
[Guest]: I think in Indian context, or in context of cricket boards, which are richer, which are
[Guest]: paying a great deal of money to their players, I would agree.
[Guest]: But the danger lies in not the top cricketers being involved.
[Guest]: The danger lies is that the bookies have infiltrated to such an extent that they target young budding
[Guest]: players from the league level only.
[Guest]: It is like a manager signing a player that, okay, I'll give you so much and he spots the
[Guest]: talent and he says, at the age of 17, 18, he thinks this fellow can become a Tendulkar
[Guest]: and let me be the first to sign him.
[Guest]: I'm investing in future.
[Guest]: So a lot of these bookies, as I write in this book also, what Ajay Sharma talks about MK
[Guest]: and how as a small time, as a young budding cricketer, he targeted him and paid him, gave
[Guest]: him money for hitting a good hundred.
[Guest]: Basically he was making an investment.
[Guest]: So many of these players, if they come from junior league levels and are already on the
[Guest]: payroll of a bookie and they say one of them becomes a top cricketer, what happens?
[Guest]: I mean, I'm just giving you a possibility.
[Amit Varma]: So it makes sense that you invest in 50 junior cricketers and invest in the sense that you
[Amit Varma]: go up to them after a match and you give, like in Ajay Sharma's case, you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: somebody went up after he played a good innings and give him a hundred rupee note.
[Guest]: And he was so happy because he's being appreciated, which he doesn't know, but then that relationship
[Guest]: is formed.
[Guest]: That fellow must be giving him money for more and more for inside information, even at the
[Guest]: league level, small DDCA league level, there are betting taking place and then you kind
[Amit Varma]: of manipulate.
[Amit Varma]: And initially it will be harmful, harmless, seemingly harmless stuff, like tell me about
[Amit Varma]: the selection beforehand or tell me, you know, what's the plan is if you win the toss or
[Amit Varma]: lose the toss.
[Amit Varma]: But later on, it then goes into the serious and clearly illegal territory.
[Guest]: And by that time, you're too much.
[Guest]: That is why it's very important to have a kind of a fair, transparent crackdown instead
[Guest]: of saying, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: It is not as if India's image gets tarnished or some other country's image gets tarnished.
[Guest]: It's the right thing to do.
[Guest]: I mean, people get tempted, there is corruption, very rich people do more and more corruption
[Guest]: to earn more money.
[Guest]: Another point I want to make it there, there are countries who hardly pay their cricketers.
[Guest]: These are retired cricketers.
[Guest]: These are cricketers who become big names in T20 leagues.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not saying they take money, but what stakes do they have in, you know, their
[Guest]: career is over, they hardly get any money from their board.
[Guest]: So that what I'm saying is that let's not just think that it's that there's no possibility
[Amit Varma]: of this happening.
[Amit Varma]: So let's now, you know, move on from this unpleasant subject and to the happier subject
[Amit Varma]: of how Indian cricket evolved.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, one way in which the Ganguly era was a step from the past is that everybody's
[Amit Varma]: making decent money now and, you know, the some of the bad incentives of the past may
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily exist.
[Amit Varma]: But the other way in which it changed is that I think the Ganguly generation was perhaps
[Amit Varma]: almost the first generation of Indian cricket, which represented that post liberalization
[Amit Varma]: reality, that the middle class has exploded.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of seeing the explosion of the middle class is that number one in your big
[Amit Varma]: traditional cities like Bombay and Delhi, the opportunity cost of playing cricket has
[Amit Varma]: gone up because there's so much else you can do with your time, so many more opportunities,
[Amit Varma]: so many ways of leisure, so many things you can aspire to, that people in the big cities
[Amit Varma]: will not necessarily travel in those numbers for three hours on a local train to get to
[Amit Varma]: Shivaji Park and, you know, play every morning at six o'clock, while at the same time, people
[Amit Varma]: in the small towns across India are now coming into the means where they can buy cricket
[Amit Varma]: bats and cricket equipment, and there are nets springing up and academies springing
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, in that generation in the aughties, Ganguly Dravid onwards, and really exploding
[Amit Varma]: Dhoni onwards, where you have the traditional cricket centers of Bombay, Delhi, not producing
[Amit Varma]: so many cricketers, but cricketers coming from small towns all over the place from humbler
[Amit Varma]: backgrounds from different backgrounds.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, tell me a little bit about like, first, would you sort of agree with this thesis
[Amit Varma]: that this is that larger change in society is kind of being reflected in this way?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what are the ways in which you found Indian cricket evolving, you know, during
[Amit Varma]: that interesting period?
[Guest]: Yes, this is obviously true, because more and more cricketers from smaller towns started
[Guest]: getting selected in the Indian team, which obviously had to do with the greater infrastructure,
[Guest]: more money being spread around.
[Guest]: Secondly, I think when you talk about that era, something what I found very interesting
[Guest]: and very, I mean, trend setting or something very, very significant was that these Dravid,
[Guest]: Pendulkar, Lakshman, Kumble, they were cricketers who, I mean, they may have had their differences
[Guest]: with each other, they may have felt that, okay, maybe I should have been captain, Ganguly
[Guest]: shouldn't have been captain, but they were team players.
[Guest]: They were incredibly like, glued or wedded to the idea of team doing well.
[Guest]: And where Ganguly played a significant role was, I'm not sure if Ganguly had not been
[Guest]: the captain.
[Guest]: If he had not been the captain, I'm not sure what role he would have played.
[Guest]: But since he was the captain, and he was aware of the fact that he had to become a bigger
[Guest]: captain, the team should win, had to win, he also invested a lot of his energy and effort
[Guest]: in trying to improve the team and not trying to disrupt, not trying to feel that, okay,
[Guest]: Pendulkar might be playing games with me or Lakshman.
[Guest]: So he let them be.
[Guest]: He realized that they were better cricketers or he gave them their respect.
[Guest]: And then, because Ganguly had such access to Dalmia, the board president, and as I write
[Guest]: in the book, that Dalmia couldn't afford to annoy Ganguly because of the peculiar Ganguly
[Guest]: from Bengal and Dalmia doing business in Bengal.
[Guest]: So he had to protect him.
[Guest]: So Ganguly could take a lot of liberties with Dalmia and get away with it.
[Guest]: So in a way, it helped Indian cricket because these four cricketers would tell Ganguly that
[Guest]: we need this, this, this, John Wright would say we need and Ganguly would go to Dalmia
[Guest]: say we and Dalmia would do it despite maybe he may not want to do a lot of these things.
[Guest]: So that revolutionized Indian cricket and rest is the more and more money.
[Guest]: It spread wider.
[Guest]: More and more players are now coming from small town and it's great for Indian cricket
[Guest]: that we have such with the game has spread so much.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's mind blowing and the IPL just took it a step forward, I think by just making
[Amit Varma]: it possible for so many, by incentivizing so many more players to get into the game,
[Amit Varma]: because earlier if you have to get into the India team to make serious money, and suddenly
[Amit Varma]: with the IPL, no, you know, you can play for one of the franchises and make serious money.
[Amit Varma]: And also what it does is it takes politics out of the, or rather the local regional politics
[Amit Varma]: out of the equation in the sense that, you know, you've spoken about the politics of
[Amit Varma]: selection at the junior level at the local level, everybody knows the politics around
[Amit Varma]: getting selected for Delhi and you know, which is like one famous sort of basket case and
[Amit Varma]: suddenly that's out because now, instead of a monopsony, where you have just one buyer
[Amit Varma]: for your services, and therefore that buyer is all powerful, you have these different
[Amit Varma]: teams competing for the best talent and that only you know, that works much better.
[Amit Varma]: So what is, you know, your sense of cricket having come to where it is today, like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, like you earlier said, I think it was before the conversation was being recorded,
[Amit Varma]: that we can have seven, eight teams today, which are world class, we can actually pick
[Amit Varma]: up that many teams like a historic win in Australia, for example, was really done by
[Amit Varma]: a third string bunch of players who have all gotten confidence from playing against the
[Amit Varma]: best in the world in the IPL.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no self doubt anymore, you know, they've honed their skills in that arena.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense?
[Amit Varma]: And also, but I'll leave the next question for later, but what is sort of your sense
[Amit Varma]: with where Indian cricket is today, from
[Guest]: Indian cricket has never been as strong as it's today, financially, talent wise, without
[Guest]: doubt.
[Guest]: IPL has helped not just cricketers make money, but I think it has also helped a lot of these
[Guest]: Indian cricketers to interact with the best with the world.
[Guest]: And since IPL is played in an environment where it seems like it's a World Cup match,
[Guest]: full stadiums, so it has helped them to soak in a lot of pressure.
[Guest]: I mean, otherwise, a second or third string team playing in Australia would have cracked
[Guest]: under pressure.
[Guest]: But these players have seen that pressure in IPL.
[Guest]: So they are pressure.
[Guest]: I mean, it's making them pressure proof.
[Guest]: It is helping a lot, definitely is helping Indian cricket a lot.
[Guest]: My only reservation is not, see, I may not be a great IPL fan, because maybe I enjoy
[Guest]: watching a five day game, I enjoy it far more, I find, but that's a personal preference.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that IPL is bad.
[Guest]: My problem with IPL is that since there is so much money coming from it, and more and
[Guest]: more money is coming, it's spreading.
[Guest]: Will there be enough time in future left for Indian board or even other boards to invest
[Guest]: in test cricket?
[Guest]: After all, as I say, there are only 365 days in a year.
[Guest]: You already have now extended it to three months.
[Guest]: That leaves just nine months for traditional cricket, in which there will be World Cups
[Guest]: also one day T20.
[Guest]: So it hardly leaves time.
[Guest]: And if India becomes more and more greedy, they will keep on extending it more and more.
[Guest]: And I hope the time doesn't come.
[Guest]: I hope the administrators have enough vision, acumen, not to destroy the traditional format,
[Guest]: because it's still enjoyable to watch.
[Guest]: There are skills involved there, which new entrants in the field may not enjoy that,
[Guest]: but there are still people who enjoy that.
[Guest]: And it's those skills which help even those who are playing IPL, because of their foundations
[Guest]: are good enough that they can do all the inventive stuff in IPL.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think, you know, there are two sort of different ways that I think about
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is that T20 cricket is a different sport from test cricket.
[Amit Varma]: It's like as different as badminton and tennis are.
[Amit Varma]: You just require completely different sets of skills and there are different sets of
[Amit Varma]: values involved.
[Amit Varma]: And I love both, but I can, I'm not going to pass judgment, we were talking about being
[Amit Varma]: judgmental earlier.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not going to, I'm not going to pass judgment against someone who likes one form and doesn't
[Amit Varma]: like the other, whichever one it is, and may both thrive.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, I think T20 cricket has been excellent for test cricket, because
[Amit Varma]: it's in a sense kept the game alive, because I think otherwise, there was a danger that
[Amit Varma]: there just wasn't enough money in the game.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, I think T20 cricket can play the part moving ahead of subsidizing
[Amit Varma]: test cricket.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one really cold blooded way of looking at it would be saying that everything is supply
[Amit Varma]: and demand.
[Amit Varma]: If people don't want to watch test cricket, let it die.
[Amit Varma]: What I would rather, the way I would rather look at it is just to say that there is now
[Amit Varma]: so much money in coming from T20 cricket that it doesn't cost that much to keep test cricket
[Amit Varma]: alive and thriving.
[Amit Varma]: Even though it's a separate sport, you know, that's, that's, that's also got a tradition
[Amit Varma]: of its own.
[Amit Varma]: I think over time, people will hopefully learn to and I think even younger people can get
[Amit Varma]: turned on by it.
[Amit Varma]: Like we've had outstanding test cricket happen in recent times.
[Amit Varma]: Just outstanding.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of hopeful that my my next question before I before we wrap it up, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'll ask you a couple of final questions after this.
[Amit Varma]: But my next question comes from something that you know, there's another lovely para
[Amit Varma]: where you've written where you talk about the early days, late 60s, 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written, apart from the polio stricken Chandrashekhar's mesmerizing achievements
[Amit Varma]: and the emergence of Sunil Gavaskar on the 1971 tour of the West Indies, it was a pint
[Amit Varma]: sized Gundappa Vishwanath century at Kanpur on his debut that stands out in my memory.
[Amit Varma]: It was against the Australians in the 1969 series, when Anand Settlewad, the most eloquent
[Amit Varma]: and objective of all Indian radio commentators would describe his counterattacking, we would
[Amit Varma]: swell with pride as if we had something to do with his skillful strokes, a stock quote.
[Amit Varma]: And on the subject of this pride, later, you talk about how during a particular match,
[Amit Varma]: I think must have been 76.
[Amit Varma]: When we played West Indies, you talk about the commentator Ravi Chaturvedi actually weeping
[Amit Varma]: during a telecast because India has won and then saying yeh Gandhi ka desh, yeh Nehru
[Amit Varma]: ka desh, right.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a positive aspect to this that there is a sense of shared pride and community
[Amit Varma]: especially important in a country in those days where there may not have been so many
[Amit Varma]: occasions for shared pride and community.
[Amit Varma]: But in modern times, this can take on really ugly undertones, you know, what Orwell called
[Amit Varma]: a war minus a shooting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Mike Marquez, he wrote a book with the title.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the nationalism, the jingoism that can result, the sort of, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: ugliness that comes from that, the adversarial feeling between fans and between supporters.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the teams, of course, are adversaries in a sporting context.
[Amit Varma]: But even outside of that, and there is the danger then that that feeds into a lot of
[Amit Varma]: the things that divide us like the tribalism and like the sense of, you know, our people
[Amit Varma]: and the other, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, I think the IPL mitigates it because it's impossible to get a tribal
[Amit Varma]: loyalty towards any of these franchises, because they're all pretty characterless, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, at least when I watch the IPL, I just watch it for the good cricket and to
[Amit Varma]: see individuals play well, but there's no loyalty per se being formed.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, how does this aspect of how the game is viewed, sort of make you feel?
[Guest]: Well, as I hear Gandhi ka Desh, Nehru ka Desh, a young kid feeling thrilled and almost crying
[Guest]: with Ravi Chaturvedi on the radio and feeling so proud to see, let's take the other moment
[Guest]: of Ganguly taking off his shirt and swinging in the air and then at Lord's and we beat
[Guest]: in the Englishman.
[Guest]: Today, all these things in today's context of what is happening in this nation acquire
[Guest]: a more menacing kind of meaning.
[Guest]: That's the, it's not, we all have loyalties, we all feel happy that our team has done well,
[Guest]: but it's not at the cost of showing the other person down.
[Guest]: It's how the sport is, okay, fine, we won some, we lose some, if we won, win more, great.
[Guest]: But to reach a stage where winning means that we are a superior race, that's dangerous,
[Guest]: that's equally dangerous.
[Guest]: I suddenly remembered my Australia trip of 99, when Australia was smashing everyone and
[Guest]: there was this literal feeling of, in Australia, among Australian itself, they wanted their
[Guest]: own team to lose because they thought these are arrogant, some of them, that they are
[Guest]: like this nationalism and this macho, broad, strong team, beating every team to pulp, is
[Guest]: like taking nationalism to a level which is dangerous for them.
[Guest]: I could see that.
[Guest]: And I could see as India 99 losing every test match badly and literally feeling that we
[Guest]: as Indians are being treated badly, cricket, we are losing on the ground, and they discriminate
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: And I could see my other extreme reaction because of that.
[Guest]: So there has to be a balance.
[Guest]: I think, yeh Gandhi ka desh, Nehru ka desh in 71 or 76 may sound very different from
[Guest]: if it is done today.
[Guest]: So that's how everything is in a context.
[Guest]: If the context changes, the meaning also changes.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, today, if someone says yeh Nehru ka desh, he'll be treated as an anti-national.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, you know, you've been very generous with your time.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just urge all my listeners to go out and read your book, because it's really
[Amit Varma]: impossible to sort of convey what is in that book and the enjoyment I got from reading
[Amit Varma]: it in a mere podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end by asking a traditional question I often ask my guests, that, you know, would
[Amit Varma]: you recommend for me and my listeners, you know, books, music, films that mean a lot
[Amit Varma]: to you, that you hold close to your heart that are sort of desert island offerings for
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Guest]: Well, I would say Kurosawa for one must watch.
[Guest]: And maybe I lately watched a lot of Ray again, and I would say Mahanagar or Seema Bhaddava,
[Guest]: I would say pick up any one of Ray's masterpieces.
[Guest]: I think they show Indian society in a different light and with a lot of perspective and a
[Guest]: lot of feeling, a lot of meaning and music, 50s, I would say 50s, golden era in the film
[Guest]: music, wonderful music.
[Guest]: I mean, it was a fusion music, a lot of it I realized is copied from various places in
[Guest]: the world, whether from West or East.
[Guest]: But regardless of that, it's a wonderful music to listen, books.
[Guest]: I mean, I am not a voracious reader, but I do read.
[Guest]: I would suggest that lately I'm reading Ambedkar's Annihilation of Caste.
[Guest]: I think I'll, and in the present political context, I would suggest that if go and buy
[Guest]: that book, because Ambedkar is being today seen as this great figure, even by the right,
[Guest]: they say that he's the greatest and even greater than Gandhi.
[Guest]: So his seminal work of what he thought of India, what he thought of caste, what he thought
[Guest]: of exploitation, they should read that book.
[Guest]: Great, Pradeep.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for liking the book and doing this podcast.
[Guest]: I really, really enjoyed it and thanks a lot again.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Now before we end this episode, I'll share with you a little quip I prepared for Pradeep,
[Amit Varma]: but I didn't actually get the chance to use it during the episode.
[Amit Varma]: So here is it.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to tell him, Pradeep sir, you write every day, so why is your name Pradeep Magazine?
[Amit Varma]: Your name should be Pradeep Newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Now that's out of the way and Pradeep is not in front of me as I record this, so I can't
[Amit Varma]: get whacked for it.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode and I really enjoyed recording it, do go over
[Amit Varma]: to your nearest bookstore online or offline and buy both of Pradeep's books, Not Quite
[Amit Varma]: Cricket and especially his wonderful memoir, which has recently been released, Not Just
[Amit Varma]: Cricket, A Reporter's Journey Through Modern India.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Pradeep on Twitter at Pradeep Magazine.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you!